Blindsight
Peter Watts




    Prologue	3
    Theseus	8
    Rorschach	111
    Charybdis	296
    Acknowledgments	303
    Notes and References	305




"This is what fascinates me most in existence: the peculiar necessity of imagining what is, in fact, real."
—Philip Gourevitch


"You will die like a dog for no good reason."
—Ernest Hemingway



Prologue

 "Try to touch the past.  Try to deal with the past.  It's not real.  It's just a dream."
 —Ted Bundy


It didn't start out here.  Not with the scramblers or Rorschach, not with Big Ben or Theseus or the vampires.  Most people would say it started with the Fireflies, but they'd be wrong.  It ended with all those things.
For me, it began with Robert Paglino. 
At the age of eight, he was my best and only friend.  We were fellow outcasts, bound by complementary misfortune.  Mine was developmental.  His was genetic:  an uncontrolled genotype that left him predisposed to nearsightedness, acne, and (as it later turned out) a susceptibility to narcotics.    His parents had never had him optimized.  Those few TwenCen relics who still believed in God also held that one shouldn't try to improve upon His handiwork.  So although both of us could have been repaired, only one of us had been.  
I arrived at the playground to find Pag the center of attention for some half-dozen kids, those lucky few in front punching him in the head, the others making do with taunts of mongrel and polly while waiting their turn.  I watched him raise his arms, almost hesitantly, to ward off the worst of the blows.  I could see into his head better than I could see into my own; he was scared that his attackers might think those hands were coming up to hit back, that they'd read it as an act of defiance and hurt him even more.  Even then, at the tender age of eight and with half my mind gone, I was becoming a superlative observer.
But I didn't know what to do.
I hadn't seen much of Pag lately.  I was pretty sure he'd been avoiding me.  Still, when your best friend's in trouble you help out, right?  Even if the odds are impossible—and how many eight-year-olds would go up against six bigger kids for a sandbox buddy?—at least you call for backup.  Flag a sentry.  Something.
I just stood there.  I didn't even especially want to help him.
That didn't make sense.  Even if he hadn't been my best friend, I should at least have empathized.  I'd suffered less than Pag in the way of overt violence; my seizures tended to keep the other kids at a distance, scared them even as they incapacitated me.  Still.  I was no stranger to the taunts and insults, or the foot that appears from nowhere to trip you up en route from A to B.  I knew how that felt.
Or I had, once.
But that part of me had been cut out along with the bad wiring.  I was still working up the algorithms to get it back, still learning by observation.  Pack animals always tear apart the weaklings in their midst.  Every child knows that much instinctively.  Maybe I should just let that process unfold, maybe I shouldn't try to mess with nature.  Then again,  Pag's parents hadn't messed with nature, and look what it got them:  a son curled up in the dirt while a bunch of engineered superboys kicked in his ribs.
In the end, propaganda worked where empathy failed.  Back then I didn't so much think as observe, didn't deduce so much as remember—and what I remembered was a thousand inspirational stories lauding anyone who ever stuck up for the underdog.  
So I picked up a rock the size of my fist and hit two of Pag's assailants across the backs of their heads before anyone even knew I was in the game.
A third, turning to face the new threat, took a blow to the face that audibly crunched the bones of his cheek.  I remember wondering why I didn't take any satisfaction from that sound, why it meant nothing beyond the fact I had one less opponent to worry about.
The rest of them ran at the sight of blood.  One of the braver promised me I was dead, shouted "Fucking zombie!" over his shoulder as he disappeared around the corner.
Three decades it took, to see the irony in that remark.
Two of the enemy twitched at my feet.  I kicked one in the head until it stopped moving, turned to the other.  Something grabbed my arm and I swung without thinking, without looking until Pag yelped and ducked out of reach.
"Oh," I said.  "Sorry."
One thing lay motionless.  The other moaned and held its head and curled up in a ball.
"Oh shit," Pag panted.  Blood coursed unheeded from his nose and splattered down his shirt.  His cheek was turning blue and yellow.  "Oh shit oh shit oh shit..."
I thought of something to say.  "You all right?"
"Oh shit, you—I mean, you never..."  He wiped his mouth.  Blood smeared the back of his hand. "Oh man are we in trouble."
"They started it."
"Yeah, but you—I mean, look at them!"
The moaning thing was crawling away on all fours.  I wondered how long it would be before it found reinforcements.  I wondered if I should kill it before then.
"You'da never done that before," Pag said.
Before the operation, he meant.
I actually did feel something then—faint, distant, but unmistakable.  I felt angry.  "They started—"
Pag backed away, eyes wide.  "What are you doing? Put that down!"
I'd raised my fists.  I didn't remember doing that.  I unclenched them.  It took a while.  I had to look at my hands very hard for a long, long time.
The rock dropped to the ground, blood-slick and glistening. 
"I was trying to help."  I didn't understand why he couldn't see that.
"You're, you're not the same," Pag said from a safe distance.  "You're not even Siri any more."
"I am too.  Don't be a fuckwad."
"They cut out your brain!"
"Only half.  For the ep—"
"I know for the epilepsy!  You think I don't know?  But you were in that half—or, like, part of you was..."  He struggled with the words, with the concept behind them.  "And now you're different.  It's like, your mom and dad murdered you—"
"My mom and dad," I said, suddenly quiet, "saved my life.  I would have died."
"I think you did die," said my best and only friend.  "I think Siri died, they scooped him out and threw him away and you're some whole other kid that just, just grew back out of what was left.  You're not the same.  Ever since.  You're not the same."
I still don't know if Pag really knew what he was saying.  Maybe his mother had just pulled the plug on whatever game he'd been wired into for the previous eighteen hours, forced him outside for some fresh air.  Maybe, after fighting pod people in gamespace, he couldn't help but see them everywhere.  Maybe.
But you could make a case for what he said.  I do remember Helen telling me (and telling me) how difficult it was to adjust.  Like you had a whole new personality, she said, and why not?  There's a reason they call it radical hemispherectomy:  half the brain thrown out with yesterday's krill, the remaining half press-ganged into double duty.  Think of all the rewiring that one lonely hemisphere must have struggled with as it tried to take up the slack.  It turned out okay, obviously.  The brain's a very flexible piece of meat; it took some doing, but it adapted.  I adapted.  Still.  Think of all that must have been squeezed out, deformed, reshaped by the time the renovations were through.  You could argue that I'm a different person than the one who used to occupy this body.
The grownups showed up eventually, of course.  Medicine was bestowed, ambulances called.  Parents were outraged, diplomatic volleys exchanged, but it's tough to drum up neighborhood outrage on behalf of your injured baby when playground surveillance from three angles shows the little darling—and five of his buddies— kicking in the ribs of a disabled boy.   My mother, for her part, recycled the usual complaints about problem children and absentee fathers—Dad was off again in some other hemisphere—but the dust settled pretty quickly.  Pag and I even stayed friends, after a short hiatus that reminded us both of the limited social prospects open to schoolyard rejects who don't stick together.
So I survived that and a million other childhood experiences.  I grew up and I got along.  I learned to fit in.  I observed, recorded, derived the algorithms and mimicked appropriate behaviors.  Not much of it was—heartfelt, I guess the word is.  I had friends and enemies, like everyone else.  I chose them by running through checklists of behaviors and circumstances compiled from years of observation.
I may have grown up distant but I grew up objective, and I have Robert Paglino to thank for that.  His seminal observation set everything in motion.  It led me into Synthesis, fated me to our disastrous encounter with the Scramblers, spared me the worse fate befalling Earth.  Or the better one, I suppose, depending on your point of view.  Point of view matters:  I see that now, blind, talking to myself, trapped in a coffin falling past the edge of the solar system.  I see it for the first time since some beaten bloody friend on a childhood battlefield convinced me to throw my own point of view away.
He may have been wrong.  I may have been.  But that, that distance—that chronic sense of being an alien among your own kind—it's not entirely a bad thing. 
It came in especially handy when the real aliens came calling.







Theseus
    


"Blood makes noise."  —Susanne Vega

Imagine you are Siri Keeton:
You wake in an agony of resurrection, gasping after a record-shattering bout of sleep apnea spanning one hundred forty days.  You can feel your blood, syrupy with dobutamine and leuenkephalin, forcing its way through arteries shriveled by months on standby.  The body inflates in painful increments: blood vessels dilate; flesh peels apart from flesh; ribs crack in your ears with sudden unaccustomed flexion.  Your joints have seized up through disuse.  You're a stick-man, frozen in some perverse rigor vitae.
You'd scream if you had the breath.
Vampires did this all the time, you remember.  It was normal for them, it was their own unique take on resource conservation.  They could have taught your kind a few things about restraint, if that absurd aversion to right-angles hadn't done them in at the dawn of civilization.  Maybe they still can.  They're back now, after all— raised from the grave with the voodoo of paleogenetics, stitched together from junk genes and fossil marrow steeped in the blood of sociopaths and high-functioning autistics.  One of them commands this very mission.  A handful of his genes live on in your own body so it too can rise from the dead, here at the edge of interstellar space.  Nobody gets past Jupiter without becoming part vampire.
The pain begins, just slightly, to recede.  You fire up your inlays and access your own vitals:  it'll be long minutes before your body responds fully to motor commands,  hours before it stops hurting.  The pain's an unavoidable side effect.  That's just what happens when you splice vampire subroutines into Human code.  You asked about painkillers once, but nerve blocks of any kind compromise metabolic reactivation.  Suck it up, soldier.
You wonder if this was how it felt for Chelsea, before the end.  But that evokes a whole other kind of pain, so you block it out and concentrate on the life pushing its way back into your extremities.  Suffering in silence, you check the logs for fresh telemetry.
You think:  That can't be right.
Because if it is, you're in the wrong part of the universe.  You're not in the Kuiper Belt where you belong:  you're high above the ecliptic and deep into the Oort, the realm of long-period comets that only grace the sun every million years or so.  You've gone interstellar, which means (you bring up the system clock) you've been undead for eighteen hundred days.
You've overslept by almost five years.
The lid of your coffin slides away.  Your own cadaverous body reflects from the mirrored bulkhead opposite, a desiccated lungfish waiting for the rains.  Bladders of isotonic saline cling to its limbs like engorged antiparasites, like the opposite of leeches.  You remember the needles going in just before you shut down, way back when your veins were more than dry twisted filaments of beef jerky.
Szpindel's reflection stares back from his own pod to your immediate right.  His face is as bloodless and skeletal as yours.  His wide sunken eyes jiggle in their sockets as he reacquires his own links, sensory interfaces so massive that your own off-the-shelf inlays amount to shadow-puppetry in comparison.
You hear coughing and the rustling of limbs just past line-of-sight, catch glimpses of reflected motion where the others stir at the edge of vision.
"Wha—" Your voice is barely more than a hoarse whisper.  "…happ…?"
Szpindel works his jaw.  Bone cracks audibly.
"…Sssuckered," he hisses.
You haven't even met the aliens yet, and already they're running rings around you.

*

So we dragged ourselves back from the dead:  five part-time cadavers, naked, emaciated, barely able to move even in zero gee.  We emerged from our coffins like premature moths ripped from their cocoons, still half-grub.  We were alone and off course and utterly helpless, and it took a conscious effort to remember:  they would never have risked our lives if we hadn't been essential.
"Morning, commissar."  Isaac Szpindel reached one trembling, insensate hand for the feedback gloves at the base of his pod.  Just past him, Susan James was curled into a loose fetal ball, murmuring to herselves.  Only Amanda Bates, already dressed and cycling through a sequence of bone-cracking isometrics,  possessed anything approaching mobility.  Every now and then she tried bouncing a rubber ball off the bulkhead; but not even she was up to catching it on the rebound yet.
The journey had melted us down to a common archetype.  James' round cheeks and hips, Szpindel's high forehead and lumpy, lanky chassis—even the enhanced carboplatinum brick shit-house that Bates used for a body— all had shriveled to the same desiccated collection of sticks and bones.  Even our hair seemed to have become strangely discolored during the voyage, although I knew that was impossible.  More likely it was just filtering the pallor of the skin beneath.  Still.  The pre-dead James had been dirty blond, Szpindel's hair had been almost dark enough to call black— but the stuff floating from their scalps looked the same dull kelpy brown to me now.  Bates kept her head shaved, but even her eyebrows weren't as rusty as I remembered them.
We'd revert to our old selves soon enough.  Just add water.  For now, though, the old slur was freshly relevant:  the Undead really did all look the same, if you didn't know how to look.
If you did, of course—if you forgot appearance and watched for motion, ignored meat and studied topology—you'd never mistake one for another.  Every facial tic was a data point, every conversational pause spoke volumes more than the words to either side.  I could see James' personae shatter and coalesce in the flutter of an eyelash.  Szpindel's unspoken distrust of Amanda Bates shouted from the corner of his smile.  Every twitch of the phenotype cried aloud to anyone who knew the language.
"Where's—" James croaked, coughed, waved one spindly arm at Sarasti's empty coffin gaping at the end of the row. 
Szpindel's lips cracked in a small rictus.  "Gone back to Fab, eh?  Getting the ship to build some dirt to lie on."
"Probably communing with the Captain."  Bates breathed louder than she spoke, a dry rustle from pipes still getting reacquainted with the idea of respiration. 
James again:  "Could do that up here."
"Could take a dump up here, too," Szpindel rasped.  "Some things you do by yourself, eh?"
And some things you kept to yourself.   Not many baselines felt comfortable locking stares with a vampire—Sarasti, ever courteous, tended to avoid eye contact for exactly that reason—but there were other surfaces to his topology, just as mammalian and just as readable.  If he had withdrawn from public view, maybe I was the reason.  Maybe he was keeping secrets.
After all, Theseus damn well was. 

*

She'd taken us a good fifteen AUs towards our destination before something scared her off course.  Then she'd skidded north like a startled cat and started climbing:  a wild high three-gee burn off the ecliptic, thirteen hundred tonnes of momentum bucking against Newton's First. She'd emptied her Penn tanks, bled dry her substrate mass, squandered a hundred forty days' of fuel in hours.  Then a long cold coast through the abyss, years of stingy accounting, the thrust of every antiproton weighed against the drag of sieving it from the void.  Teleportation isn't magic:  the Icarus stream couldn't send us the actual antimatter it made, only the quantum specs.  Theseus had to filterfeed the raw material from space, one ion at a time.  For long dark years she'd made do on pure inertia, hording every swallowed atom.  Then a flip; ionizing lasers strafing the space ahead; a ramscoop thrown wide in a hard brake.  The weight of a trillion trillion protons slowed her down and refilled her gut and flattened us all over again.  Theseus had burned relentless until almost the moment of our resurrection.
It was easy enough to retrace those steps; our course was there in ConSensus for anyone to see.  Exactly why the ship had blazed that trail was another matter.  Doubtless it would all come out during the post-rez briefing.  We were hardly the first vessel to travel under the cloak of sealed orders, and if there'd been a pressing need to know by now we'd have known by now.  Still, I wondered who had locked out the Comm logs.  Mission Control, maybe.  Or Sarasti.  Or Theseus herself, for that matter.  It was easy to forget the Quantical AI at the heart of our ship.  It stayed so discreetly in the background, nurtured and carried us and permeated our existence like an unobtrusive God; but like God, it never took your calls.
Sarasti was the offical intermediary.  When the ship did speak, it spoke to him— and Sarasti called it Captain.
So did we all.

*

He'd given us four hours to come back from the dead.  It took more than three just to get me out of the crypt.  By then my brain was at least firing on most of its synapses, although my body—still sucking fluids like a thirsty sponge— continued to ache with every movement.  I swapped out drained electrolyte bags for fresh ones and headed aft. 
Fifteen minutes to spin-up.  Fifty to the post-resurrection briefing.  Just enough time for those who preferred gravity-bound sleep to haul their personal effects into the drum and stake out their allotted 4.4 square meters of floor space.
Gravity—or any centripetal facsimile thereof—did not appeal to me.  I set up my own tent in zero-gee and as far to stern as possible, nuzzling the forward wall of the starboard shuttle tube.  The tent inflated like an abscess on Theseus' spine, a little climate-controlled bubble of atmosphere in the dark cavernous vacuum beneath the ship's carapace.  My own effects were minimal; it took all of thirty seconds to stick them to the wall, and another thirty to program the tent's environment.
Afterwards I went for a hike.  After five years, I needed the exercise.
Stern was closest, so I started there:  at the shielding that separated payload from propulsion.  A single sealed hatch blistered the aft bulkhead dead center.  Behind it, a service tunnel wormed back through machinery best left untouched by human hands.  The fat superconducting torus of the ramscoop ring; the antennae fan behind it, unwound now into an indestructible soap-bubble big enough to shroud a city, its face turned sunward to catch the faint quantum sparkle of the Icarus antimatter stream.  More shielding behind that; then the telematter reactor, where raw hydrogen and refined information conjured fire three hundred times hotter than the sun's.  I knew the incantations, of course—antimatter cracking and deconstruction, the teleportation of quantum serial numbers—but it was still magic to me, how we'd come so far so fast.  It would have been magic to anyone.
Except Sarasti, maybe.
Around me, the same magic worked at cooler temperatures and to less volatile ends: a small riot of chutes and dispensers crowded the bulkhead on all sides.  A few of those openings would choke on my fist: one or two could swallow me whole.  Theseus' fabrication plant could build everything from cutlery to cockpits.  Give it a big enough matter stockpile and it could have even been built another Theseus, albeit in many small pieces and over a very long time.  Some wondered if it could build another crew as well, although we'd all been assured that was impossible.  Not even these machines had fine enough fingers to reconstruct a few trillion synapses in the space of a human skull.  Not yet, anyway.
I believed it.  They would never have shipped us out fully-assembled if there'd been a cheaper alternative.
I faced forward.  Putting the back of my head against that sealed hatch I could see almost to Theseus' bow,  an uninterrupted line-of-sight extending to a tiny dark bull's-eye thirty meters ahead.   It was like staring at a great textured target in shades of white and gray:  concentric circles, hatches centered within bulkheads one behind another, perfectly aligned.   Every one stood open, in nonchalant defiance of a previous generation's safety codes.  We could keep them closed if we wanted to, if it made us feel safer.  That was all it would do, though;  it wouldn't improve our empirical odds one whit.  In the event of trouble those hatches would slam shut long milliseconds before Human senses could even make sense of an alarm.  They weren't even computer-controlled.  Theseus' body parts had reflexes.
I pushed off against the stern plating—wincing at the tug and stretch of disused tendons—and coasted forward, leaving Fab behind.   The shuttle-access hatches to Scylla and Charybdis briefly constricted my passage to either side.  Past them the spine widened into a corrugated extensible cylinder two meters across and—at the moment—maybe fifteen long.  A pair of ladders ran opposite each other along its length; raised portholes the size of manhole covers stippled the bulkhead to either side.   Most of those just looked into the hold.  A couple served as general-purpose airlocks, should anyone want to take a stroll beneath the carapace.  One opened into my tent.  Another, four meters further forward, opened into Bates'.  
From a third, just short of the forward bulkhead, Jukka Sarasti climbed into view like a long white spider.
If he'd been Human I'd have known instantly what I saw there, I'd have smelled murderer all over his topology.  And I wouldn't have been able to even guess at the number of his victims, because his affect was so utterly without remorse.  The killing of a hundred would leave no more stain on Sarasti's surfaces than the swatting of an insect; guilt beaded and rolled off this creature like water on wax.
But Sarasti wasn't human.  Sarasti was a whole different animal, and coming from him all those homicidal refractions meant nothing more than predator.  He had the inclination, was born to it; whether he had ever acted on it was between him and Mission Control.
Maybe they cut you some slack, I didn't say to him.  Maybe it's just a cost of doing business.  You're mission-critical, after all.  For all I know you cut a deal.  You're so very smart, you know we wouldn't have brought you back in the first place if we hadn't needed you.  From the day they cracked the vat you knew you had leverage.
Is that how it works, Jukka?  You save the world, and the folks who hold your leash agree to look the other way?
As a child I'd read tales about jungle predators transfixing their prey with a stare.  Only after I'd met Jukka Sarasti did I know how it felt.  But he wasn't looking at me now.  He was focused on installing his own tent, and even if he had looked me in the eye there'd have been nothing to see but the dark wraparound visor he wore in deference to Human skittishness.  He ignored me as I grabbed a nearby rung and squeezed past.
I could have sworn I smelled raw meat on his breath.
Into the drum (drums, technically; the BioMed hoop at the back spun on its own bearings).  I flew through the center of a cylinder sixteen meters across.  Theseus' spinal nerves ran along its axis, the exposed plexii and piping bundled against the ladders on either side.  Past them, Szpindel's and James' freshly-erected tents rose from nooks on opposite sides of the world.  Szpindel himself floated off my shoulder, still naked but for his gloves, and I could tell from the way his fingers moved that his favorite color was green.   He anchored himself to one of three stairways to nowhere arrayed around the drum:  steep narrow steps rising five vertical meters from the deck into empty air.
The next hatch gaped dead-center of the drum's forward wall; pipes and conduits plunged into the bulkhead to each side.  I grabbed a convenient rung to slow myself—biting down once more on the pain—and floated through.
T-junction.  The spinal corridor continued forward, a smaller diverticulum branched off to an EVA cubby and the forward airlock.  I stayed the course and found myself back in the crypt, mirror-bright and less than two meters deep.  Empty pods gaped to the left; sealed ones huddled to the right.  We were so irreplaceable we'd come with replacements.  They slept on, oblivious.  I'd met three of them back in training.  Hopefully none of us would be getting reacquainted any time soon.
Only four pods to starboard, though.  No backup for Sarasti.
Another hatchway.  Smaller this time.  I squeezed through into the bridge.  Dim light there, a silent shifting mosaic of icons and alphanumerics iterating across dark glassy surfaces.  Not so much bridge as cockpit, and a cramped one at that.  I'd emerged between two acceleration couches, each surrounded by a horseshoe array of controls and readouts.  Nobody expected to ever use this compartment.  Theseus was perfectly capable of running herself, and if she wasn't we were capable of running her from our inlays, and if we weren't the odds were overwhelming that we were all dead anyway.  Still, against that astronomically off-the-wall chance, this was where one or two intrepid survivors could pilot the ship home again after everything else had failed.
Between the footwells the engineers had crammed one last hatch and one last passageway:  to the observation blister on Theseus' prow.  I hunched my shoulders (tendons cracked and complained) and pushed through—
—into darkness.  Clamshell shielding covered the outside of the dome like a pair of eyelids squeezed tight.  A single icon glowed softly from a touchpad to my left; faint stray light followed me through from the spine, brushed dim fingers across the concave enclosure.  The dome resolved in faint shades of blue and gray as my eyes adjusted.  A stale draft stirred the webbing floating from the rear bulkhead, mixed oil and machinery at the back of my throat.  Buckles clicked faintly in the breeze like impoverished wind chimes.
I reached out and touched the crystal:  the innermost layer of two, warm air piped through the gap between to cut the cold.  Not completely, though.  My fingertips chilled instantly.
Space out there.
Perhaps, en route to our original destination, Theseus had seen something that scared her clear out of the solar system.  More likely she hadn't been running away from anything but to something else, something that hadn't been discovered until we'd already died and gone from Heaven.  In which case...
I reached back and tapped the touchpad.  I half-expected nothing to happen; Theseus' windows could be as easily locked as her comm logs.  But the dome split instantly before me, a crack then a crescent then a wide-eyed lidless stare as the shielding slid smoothly back into the hull.   My fingers clenched reflexively into a fistful of webbing.  The sudden void stretched empty and unforgiving in all directions, and there was nothing to cling to but a metal disk barely four meters across.
Stars, everywhere.  So many stars that I could not for the life me understand how the sky could contain them all yet be so black.  Stars, and—
—nothing else.
What did you expect? I chided myself.  An alien mothership hanging off the starboard bow?
Well, why not?  We were out here for something.
The others were, anyway.  They'd be essential no matter where we'd ended up.  But my own situation was a bit different, I realized.  My usefulness degraded with distance.
And we were over half a light year from home.
"When it is dark enough, you can see the stars."  
—Emerson

Where was I when the lights came down?
I was emerging from the gates of Heaven, mourning a father who was—to his own mind, at least—still alive.  
It had been scarcely two months since Helen had disappeared under the cowl.  Two months by our reckoning, at least.   From her perspective it could have been a day or a decade; the Virtually Omnipotent set their subjective clocks along with everything else.
She wasn't coming back.  She would only deign to see her husband under conditions that amounted to a slap in the face.  He didn't complain.  He visited as often as she would allow:  twice a week, then once.  Then every two.  Their marriage decayed with the exponential determinism of a radioactive isotope and still he sought her out, and accepted her conditions.
On the day the lights came down, I had joined him at my mother's side.  It was a special occasion, the last time we would ever see her in the flesh.  For two months her body had lain in state along with five hundred other new ascendants on the ward, open for viewing by the next of kin.  The interface was no more real than it would ever be, of course; the body could not talk to us.  But at least it was there, its flesh warm, the sheets clean and straight.  Helen's lower face was still visible below the cowl, though eyes and ears were helmeted.   We could touch her.  My father often did.  Perhaps some distant part of her still felt it.
But eventually someone has to close the casket and dispose of the remains.  Room must be made for the new arrivals—and so we came to this last day at my mother's side.  Jim took her hand one more time.  She would still be available in her world, on her terms, but later this day the body would be packed into storage facilities crowded far too efficiently for flesh and blood visitors.  We had been assured that the body would remain intact—the muscles electrically exercised, the body flexed and fed, the corpus kept ready to return to active duty should Heaven experience some inconceivable and catastrophic meltdown.  Everything was reversible, we were told.  And yet—there were so many who had ascended, and not even the deepest catacombs go on forever.  There were rumors of dismemberment, of nonessential body parts hewn away over time according to some optimum-packing algorithm.  Perhaps Helen would be a torso this time next year, a disembodied head the year after.  Perhaps her chassis would be stripped down to the brain before we'd even left the building, awaiting only that final technological breakthrough that would herald the arrival of the Great Digital Upload.
Rumors, as I say.  I personally didn't know of anyone who'd come back after ascending, but then why would anyone want to?  Not even Lucifer left Heaven until he was pushed.
Dad might have known for sure—Dad knew more than most people, about the things most people weren't supposed to know—but he never told tales out of turn.  Whatever he knew, he'd obviously decided its disclosure wouldn't have changed Helen's mind.  That would have been enough for him.
We donned the hoods that served as day passes for the Unwired, and we met my mother in the spartan visiting room she imagined for these visits.  She'd built no windows into the world she occupied, no hint of whatever utopian environment she'd constructed for herself.   She hadn't even opted for one of the prefab visiting environments designed to minimize dissonance among visitors.  We found ourselves in a featureless beige sphere five meters across.  There was nothing in there but her.
Maybe not so far removed from her vision of utopia after all, I thought.
My father smiled.  "Helen."
"Jim."  She was twenty years younger than the thing on the bed, and still she made my skin crawl.  "Siri!  You came!"
She always used my name.  I don't think she ever called me son.
"You're still happy here?" my father asked.
"Wonderful.  I do wish you could join us."
Jim smiled.  "Someone has to keep the lights on."  
"Now you know this isn't goodbye," she said.  "You can visit whenever you like."
"Only if you do something about the scenery." Not just a joke, but a lie; Jim would have come at her call even if the gauntlet involved bare feet and broken glass.
"And Chelsea, too," Helen continued.  "It would be so nice to finally meet her after all this time."
"Chelsea's gone, Helen," I said.
"Oh yes but I know you stay in touch.  I know she was special to you.  Just because you're not together any more doesn't mean she can't—"
"You know she—"
A startling possibility stopped me in mid-sentence:  maybe I hadn't actually told them. 
"Son," Jim said quietly.  "Maybe you could give us a moment."
I would have given them a fucking lifetime.  I unplugged myself back to the ward, looked from the corpse on the bed to my blind and catatonic father in his couch, murmuring sweet nothings into the datastream.   Let them perform for each other.  Let them formalize and finalize their so-called relationship in whatever way they saw fit.  Maybe, just once, they could even bring themselves to be honest, there in that other world where everything else was a lie.  Maybe.
I felt no desire to bear witness either way.
But of course I had to go back in for my own formalities.  I adopted my role in the familial set-piece one last time, partook of the usual lies.  We all agreed that this wasn't going to change anything, and nobody deviated enough from the script to call anyone else a liar on that account.  And finally—careful to say until next time rather than goodbye—we took our leave of my mother.
I even suppressed my gag reflex long enough to give her a hug.

*

Jim had his inhaler in hand as we emerged from the darkness.  I hoped, without much hope, that he'd throw it into the garbage receptacle as we passed through the lobby.  But he raised it to his mouth and took another hit of vassopressin, that he would never be tempted.
Fidelity in an aerosol.  "You don't need that any more," I said.
"Probably not," he agreed.
"It won't work anyway.  You can't imprint on someone who isn't even there, no matter how many hormones you snort.  It just—"
Jim said nothing.  We passed beneath the muzzles of sentries panning for infiltrating Realists. 
"She's gone," I blurted.  "She doesn't care if you find someone else.  She'd be happy if you did."  It would let her pretend the books had been balanced.
"She's my wife," he told me.
"That doesn't mean what it used to.  It never did."
He smiled a bit at that.  "It's my life, son.  I'm comfortable with it."
"Dad—"
"I don't blame her," he said.  "And neither should you."
Easy for him to say.   Easy even to accept the hurt she'd inflicted on him all these years.  This cheerful façade here at the end hardly made up for the endless bitter complaints my father had endured throughout living memory.  Do you think it's easy when you disappear for months on end?  Do you think it's easy always wondering who you're with and what you're doing and if you're even alive?  Do you think it's easy raising a child like that on your own?
She'd blamed him for everything, but he bore it gracefully because he knew it was all a lie.  He knew he was only the pretense.  She wasn't leaving because he was AWOL, or unfaithful.  Her departure had nothing to do with him at all.  It was me.  Helen had left the world because she couldn't stand to look at the thing who'd replaced her son.
I would have pursued it—would have tried yet again to make my father see—but by now we'd left the gates of Heaven for the streets of Purgatory, where pedestrians on all sides murmured in astonishment and stared open-mouthed at the sky.  I followed their gaze to a strip of raw twilight between the towers, and gasped—
The stars were falling.
The Zodiac had rearranged itself into a precise grid of bright points with luminous tails.  It was as though the whole planet had been caught in some great closing net, the knots of its mesh aglow with St. Elmo's fire.  It was beautiful.  It was terrifying.
I looked away to recalibrate my distance vision, to give this ill-behaved hallucination a chance to vanish gracefully before I set my empirical gaze to high-beam.  I saw a vampire in that moment, a female, walking among us like the archetypal wolf in sheep's clothing.  Vampires were uncommon creatures at street level.  I'd never seen one in the flesh before.  
She had just stepped onto the street from the building across the way.  She stood a head taller than the rest of us, her eyes shining yellow and bright as a cat's in the deepening dark.  She realized, as I watched, that something was amiss.  She looked around, glanced at the sky—and continued on her way, totally indifferent to the cattle on all sides, to the heavenly portent that had transfixed them.  Totally indifferent to the fact that the world had just turned inside-out.
It was 1035 Greenwich Mean Time, February 13, 2082.

*

They clenched around the world like a fist, each black as the inside of an event horizon until those last bright moments when they all burned together.  They screamed as they died.  Every radio up to geostat groaned in unison, every infrared telescope went briefly snowblind.  Ashes stained the sky for weeks afterwards; mesospheric clouds, high above the jet stream, turned to glowing rust with every sunrise.  The objects, apparently, consisted largely of iron.  Nobody ever knew what to make of that.
For perhaps the first time in history, the world knew before being told: if you'd seen the sky, you had the scoop.  The usual arbiters of newsworthiness, stripped of their accustomed role in filtering reality, had to be content with merely labeling it.  It took them ninety minutes to agree on Fireflies.  A half hour after that, the first Fourier transforms appeared in the noosphere; to no one's great surprise, the Fireflies had not wasted their dying breaths on static.  There was pattern embedded in that terminal chorus, some cryptic intelligence that resisted all earthly analysis.  The experts, rigorously empirical, refused to speculate:  they only admitted that the Fireflies had said something.  They didn't know what.
Everyone else did.  How else would you explain 65,536 probes evenly dispersed along a lat-long grid that barely left any square meter of planetary surface unexposed?  Obviously the Flies had taken our picture.  The whole world had been caught with its pants down in panoramic composite freeze-frame.  We'd been surveyed—whether as a prelude to formal introductions or outright invasion was anyone's guess.
My father might have known someone who might have known.  But by then he'd long since disappeared, as he always did during times of hemispheric crisis.  Whatever he knew or didn't, he left me to find my own answers with everyone else.
There was no shortage of perspectives.  The noosphere seethed with scenarios ranging from utopian to apocalyptic.  The Fireflies had seeded lethal germs through the jet stream.  The Fireflies had been on a nature safari.  The Icarus Array was being retooled to power a doomsday weapon against the aliens.  The Icarus Array had already been destroyed.  We had decades to react; anything from another solar system would have to obey the lightspeed limit like everyone else.  We had days to live; organic warships had just crossed the asteroid belt and would be fumigating the planet within a week.
Like everyone else, I bore witness to lurid speculations and talking heads.  I visited blathernodes, soaked myself in other people's opinions.  That was nothing new, as far as it went;  I'd spent my whole life as a sort of alien ethologist in my own right, watching the world behave, gleaning patterns and protocols, learning the rules that allowed me to infiltrate human society.  It had always worked before.  Somehow, though, the presence of real aliens had changed the dynamics of the equation.  Mere observation didn't satisfy any more.  It was as though the presence of this new outgroup had forced me back into the clade whether I liked it or not; the distance between myself and the world suddenly seemed forced and faintly ridiculous.
Yet I couldn't, for my life, figure out how to let it go.
Chelsea had always said that telepresence emptied the Humanity from Human interaction.  "They say it's indistinguishable,"  she told me once, "just like having your family right there, snuggled up so you can see them and feel them and smell them next to you.  But it's not.  It's just shadows on the cave wall.  I mean, sure, the shadows come in three-dee color with force-feedback tactile interactivity.  They're good enough to fool the civilized brain.  But your gut knows those aren't people, even if it can't put its finger on how it knows.  They just don't feel real.  Know what I mean?"
I didn't.  Back then I'd had no clue what she was talking about.  But now we were all cavemen again, huddling beneath some overhang while lightning split the heavens and vast formless monsters, barely glimpsed in bright strobe-frozen instants, roared and clashed in the darkness on all sides.   There was no comfort in solitude.  You couldn't get it from interactive shadows.  You needed someone real at your side, someone to hold on to, someone to share your airspace along with your fear and hope and uncertainty.
I imagined the presence of companions who wouldn't vanish the moment I unplugged.  But Chelsea was gone, and Pag in her wake.  The few others I could have called— peers and former clients with whom my impersonations of rapport had been especially convincing—didn't seem worth the effort.  Flesh and blood had its own relationship to reality: necessary, but not sufficient.
Watching the world from a distance, it occurred to me at last:  I knew exactly what Chelsea had meant, with her Luddite ramblings about desaturated Humanity and the colorless interactions of virtual space.  I'd known all along.
I'd just never been able to see how it was any different from real life.

*

Imagine you are a machine.
Yes, I know.  But imagine you're a different kind of machine, one built from metal and plastic and designed not by blind, haphazard natural selection but by engineers and astrophysicists with their eyes fixed firmly on specific goals.  Imagine that your purpose is not to replicate, or even to survive, but to gather information.
I can imagine that easily.  It is in fact a much simpler impersonation than the kind I'm usually called on to perform.
I coast through the abyss on the colder side of Neptune's orbit.  Most of the time I exist only as an absence, to any observer on the visible spectrum:  a moving, asymmetrical silhouette blocking the stars.  But occasionally, during my slow endless spin, I glint with dim hints of reflected starlight.  If you catch me in those moments you might infer something of my true nature:  a segmented creature with foil skin, bristling with joints and dishes and spindly antennae.  Here and there a whisper of accumulated frost clings to a joint or seam, some frozen wisp of gas encountered in Jupiter space perhaps.  Elsewhere I carry the microscopic corpses of Earthly bacteria who thrived with carefree abandon on the skins of space stations or the benign lunar surface—but who had gone to crystal at only half my present distance from the sun.  Now, a breath away from Absolute Zero, they might shatter at a photon's touch. 
My heart is warm, at least.  A tiny nuclear fire burns in my thorax, leaves me indifferent to the cold outside.  It won't go out for a thousand years, barring some catastrophic accident; for a thousand years, I will listen for faint voices from Mission Control and do everything they tell me to.   So far they have told me to study comets.  Every instruction I have ever received has been a precise and unambiguous elaboration on that one overriding reason for my existence.
Which is why these latest instructions are so puzzling, for they make no sense at all.  The frequency is wrong.  The signal strength is wrong.  I cannot even understand the handshaking protocols.  I request clarification.
The response arrives almost a thousand minutes later, and it is an unprecedented mix of orders and requests for information.  I answer as best I can:  yes, this is the bearing at which signal strength was greatest.  No, it is not the usual bearing for Mission Control.  Yes, I can retransmit:  here it is, all over again.  Yes, I will go into standby mode.  
I await further instructions.  They arrive 839 minutes later, and they tell me to stop studying comets immediately.
I am to commence a controlled precessive tumble that sweeps my antennae through consecutive 5?-arc increments along all three axes, with a period of 94 seconds.  Upon encountering any transmission resembling the one which confused me, I am to fix upon the bearing of maximal signal strength and derive a series of parameter values.  I am also instructed to retransmit the signal to Mission Control.
I do as I'm told.  For a long time I hear nothing, but I am infinitely patient and incapable of boredom.  Eventually a fleeting, familiar signal brushes against my afferent array.  I reacquire and track it to source, which I am well-equipped to describe:  a trans-Neptunian comet in the Kuiper Belt, approximately two hundred kilometers in diameter.  It is sweeping a 21-cm tightbeam radio wave across the heavens with a periodicity of 4.57 seconds.  This beam does not intersect Mission Control's coordinates at any point.  It appears to be directed at a different target entirely.
It takes much longer than usual for Mission Control to respond to this information.  When it does, it tells me to change course.  Mission Control informs me that henceforth my new destination is to be referred to as Burns-Caulfield.  Given current fuel and inertial constraints I will not reach it in less than thirty-nine years.
I am to watch nothing else in the meantime.  

*

I'd been liaising for a team at the Kurzweil Institute, a fractured group of cutting-edge savants convinced they were on the verge of solving the quantum-glial paradox.  That particular log-jam had stalled AI for decades; once broken,  the experts promised we'd be eighteen months away from the first personality upload and only two years from reliable Human-consciousness emulation in a software environment.  It would spell the end of corporeal history, usher in a Singularity that had been waiting impatiently in the wings for nigh on fifty years.
Two months after Firefall, the Institute cancelled my contract.
I was actually surprised it had taken them so long.   It had cost us so much, this overnight inversion of global priorities, these breakneck measures making up for lost initiative.  Not even our shiny new post-scarcity economy could withstand such a seismic shift without lurching towards bankruptcy.   Installations in deep space, long since imagined secure by virtue of their remoteness, were suddenly vulnerable for exactly the same reason.  Lagrange habitats had to be refitted for defense against an unknown enemy.  Commercial ships on the Martian Loop were conscripted, weaponised, and reassigned; some secured the high ground over Mars while others fell sunward to guard the Icarus Array.
It didn't matter that the Fireflies hadn't fired a shot at any of these targets.  We simply couldn't afford the risk.
We were all in it together, of course, desperate to regain some hypothetical upper hand by any means necessary.  Kings and corporations scribbled IOUs on the backs of napkins and promised to sort everything out once the heat was off.  In the meantime, the prospect of Utopia in two years took a back seat to the shadow of Armageddon reaching back from next Tuesday.  The Kurzweil Institute, like everyone else, suddenly had other things to worry about.
So I returned to my apartment, split a bulb of Glenfiddich, and arrayed virtual windows like daisy petals in my head.  Everyone Icons debated on all sides, serving up leftovers two weeks past their expiry date:  

Disgraceful breakdown of global security.
No harm done.




Comsats annihilated.  Thousands dead.
Random collisions.  Accidental deaths.



(who sent them?)



We should have seen them coming. Why didn't we—
Deep space.  Inverse square.  Do the math.




They were stealthed!

(what do they want?)



We were raped!
Jesus Christ.  They just took our picture.




Why the silence?
Moon's fine.  Mars's fine.



(Where are they?)



Why haven't they made contact?
Nothing's touched the O'Neills.




Technology Implies Belligerence!

(Are they coming back?)

Nothing attacked us.

Yet
Nothing invaded.

So far.

(But where are they?)
(Are they coming back?)
(Anyone?)


JIM MOORE VOICE ONLY
ENCRYPTED
ACCEPT?

The text window blossomed directly in my line of sight, eclipsing the debate.  I read it twice.  I tried to remember the last time he'd called from the field, and couldn't.
I muted the other windows.  "Dad?"
"Son," he replied after a moment. "Are you well?"
"Like everyone else.  Still wondering whether we should be celebrating or crapping our pants."
He didn't answer immediately.  "It's a big question, all right," he said at last.
"I don't suppose you could give me any advice?  They're not telling us anything at ground level."
It was a rhetorical request.  His silence was hardly necessary to make the point.  "I know," I added after a moment.  "Sorry.  It's just, they're saying the Icarus Array went down, and—"
"You know I can't—oh."  My father paused.  "That's ridiculous.  Icarus's fine."
"It is?"
He seemed to be weighing his words.  "The Fireflies probably didn't even notice it.  There's no particle trail as long as it stays offstream, and it would be buried in solar glare unless someone knew where to search."
It was my turn to fall silent.  This conversation felt suddenly wrong.  
Because when my father went on the job, he went dark.  He never called his family.
Because even when my father came off the job, he never talked about it.  It wouldn't matter whether the Icarus Array was still online or whether it had been shredded and thrown into the sun like a thousand kilometers of torn origami; he wouldn't tell either tale unless an official announcement had been made.  Which—I refreshed an index window just to be sure— it hadn't.
Because while my father was a man of few words, he was not a man of frequent, indecisive pauses—and he had hesitated before each and every line he'd spoken in this exchange.
I tugged ever-so-gently on the line—"But they've sent ships."—and started counting.
One one-thousand, two one-thousand—
"Just a precaution.  Icarus was overdue for a visit anyway.  You don't swap out your whole grid without at least dropping in and kicking the new tires first."
Nearly three seconds to respond.
"You're on the moon," I said.
Pause.  "Close enough."    
"What are you—Dad, why are you telling me this?  Isn't this a security breach?"
"You're going to get a call," he told me.
"From who?  Why?"
"They're assembling a team.  The kind of—people you deal with."  My father was too rational to dispute the contributions of the recons and hybrids in our midst, but he'd never been able to hide his mistrust of them.
"They need a synthesist," he said.
"Isn't it lucky you've got one in the family."
Radio bounced back and forth.  "This isn't nepotism, Siri.  I wanted very much for them to pick someone else."
"Thanks for the vote of conf—"
But he'd seen it coming, and preempted me before my words could cross the distance:  "It's not a slap at your abilities and you know it. You're simply the most qualified, and the work is vital."
"So why—" I began, and stopped.  He wouldn't want to keep me away from some theoretical gig in a WestHem lab.
"What's this about, Dad?"
"The Fireflies.  They found something."
"What?"
"A radio signal.  From the Kuiper.  We traced the bearing."
"They're talking?"
"Not to us."  He cleared his throat.  "It was something of a fluke that we even intercepted the transmission."
"Who are they talking to?"
"We don't know."
"Friendly?  Hostile?"
"Son, we don't know.  The encryption seems similar, but we can't even be sure of that.  All we have is the location."
"So you're sending a team."  You're sending me.  We'd never gone to the Kuiper before.  It had been decades since we'd even sent robots.  Not that we lacked the capacity.  We just hadn't bothered; everything we needed was so much closer to home.  The Interplanetary Age had stagnated at the asteroids.
But now something lurked at the furthest edge of our backyard, calling into the void.  Maybe it was talking to some other solar system.  Maybe it was talking to something closer, something en route.
"It's not the kind of situation we can safely ignore," my father said.
"What about probes?"
"Of course.  But we can't wait for them to report back.  The follow-up's been fast-tracked; updates can be sent en route."
He gave me a few extra seconds to digest that.  When I still didn't speak, he said,  "You have to understand.  Our only edge is that as far as we know, Burns-Caulfield doesn't know we're on to it.  We have to get as much as we can in whatever window of opportunity that grants us."
But Burns-Caulfield had hidden itself.  Burns-Caulfield might not welcome a forced introduction.
"What if I refuse?"
The timelag seemed to say Mars.  
"I know you, son.  You won't."
"But if I did.  If I'm the best qualified, if the job's so vital…"
He didn't have to answer.  I didn't have to ask.  At these kind of stakes, mission-critical elements didn't get the luxury of choice.  I wouldn't even have the childish satisfaction of holding my breath and refusing to play—the will to resist is no less mechanical than the urge to breathe. Both can be subverted with the right neurochemical keys.  
"You killed my Kurzweill contract," I realized.
"That's the least of what we did."
We let the vacuum between us speak for a while.
"If I could go back and undo the—the thing that made you what you are," Dad said after a while, "I would.  In a second."
"Yeah."
"I have to go.  I just wanted to give you the heads-up."
"Yeah.  Thanks."
"I love you, son."
Where are you?  Are you coming back?
"Thanks," I said again.  "That's good to know." 

*

This is what my father could not unmake.  This is what I am:
I am the bridge between the bleeding edge and the dead center.   I stand between the Wizard of Oz and the man behind the curtain.
I am the curtain.
I am not an entirely new breed.  My roots reach back to the dawn of civilization but those precursors served a different function, a less honorable one.  They only greased the wheels of social stability; they would sugarcoat unpleasant truths, or inflate imaginary bogeymen for political expedience.  They were vital enough in their way.  Not even the most heavily-armed police state can exert brute force on all of its citizens all of the time.  Meme management is so much subtler;  the rose-tinted refraction of perceived reality, the contagious fear of threatening alternatives.  There have always been those tasked with the rotation of informational topologies, but throughout most of history they had little to do with increasing its clarity.
The new Millennium changed all that.  We've surpassed ourselves now, we're exploring terrain beyond the limits of merely human understanding.   Sometimes its contours, even in conventional space, are just too intricate for our brains to track; other times its very axes extend into dimensions inconceivable to minds built to fuck and fight on some prehistoric grassland.  So many things constrain us, from so many directions.  The most altruistic and sustainable philosophies fail before the brute brain-stem imperative of self-interest.  Subtle and elegant equations predict the behavior of the quantum world, but none can explain it.  After four thousand years we can't even prove that reality exists beyond the mind of the first-person dreamer. We have such need of intellects greater than our own.
But we're not very good at building them.  The forced matings of minds and electrons succeed and fail with equal spectacle.  Our hybrids become as brilliant as savants, and as autistic.  We graft people to prosthetics, make their overloaded motor strips juggle meat and machinery, and shake our heads when their fingers twitch and their tongues stutter.  Computers bootstrap their own offspring, grow so wise and incomprehensible that their communiqués assume the hallmarks of dementia:  unfocused and irrelevant to the barely-intelligent creatures  left behind.
And when your surpassing creations find the answers you asked for, you can't understand their analysis and you can't verify their answers.  You have to take their word on faith—
—Or you use information theory to flatten it for you, to squash the tesseract into two dimensions and the Klein bottle into three, to simplify reality and pray to whatever Gods survived the millennium that your honorable twisting of the truth hasn't ruptured any of its load-bearing pylons.  You hire people like me; the crossbred progeny of profilers and proof assistants and information theorists.
 In formal settings you'd call me Synthesist.  On the street you call me jargonaut or poppy.  If you're one of those savants whose hard-won truths are being bastardized and lobotomized for powerful know-nothings interested only in market share, you might call me a mole or a chaperone.
If you're Isaac Szpindel you'd call me commissar, and while the jibe would be a friendly one, it would also be more than that.
I've never convinced myself that we made the right choice.  I can cite the usual justifications in my sleep, talk endlessly about the rotational topology of information and the irrelevance of semantic comprehension.  But after all the words, I'm still not sure.  I don't know if anyone else is, either.  Maybe it's just some grand consensual con, marks and players all in league.  We won't admit that our creations are beyond us; they may speak in tongues, but our priests can read those signs.  Gods leave their algorithms carved into the mountainside but it's just li'l ol' me bringing the tablets down to the masses, and I don't threaten anyone.
Maybe the Singularity happened years ago.  We just don't want to admit we were left behind.


"All kinds of animals living here.  Occasional demons too." 
— Ian Anderson, Catfish Rising

The Third Wave, they called us.  All in the same boat, driving into the long dark courtesy of a bleeding-edge prototype crash-graduated from the simulators a full eighteen months ahead of schedule.  In a less fearful economy, such violence to the timetable would have bankrupted four countries and fifteen multicorps.
The first two waves came out of the gate in even more of a hurry.  I didn't find out what had happened to them until thirty minutes before the briefing, when Sarasti released the telemetry into ConSensus.  Then I opened wide; experience flooded up my inlays and spilled across my parietal cortex in glorious high-density fast forward.  Even now I can bring those data back, fresh as the day they were recorded.  I'm there.  
I'm them.
I am unmanned.  I am disposable.  I am souped-up and stripped-down, a telematter drive with a couple of cameras bolted to the front end, pushing gees that would turn meat to jelly.  I sprint joyously toward the darkness, my twin brother a stereoscopic hundred klicks to starboard, dual streams of backspat pions boosting us to relativity before poor old Theseus had even crawled past Mars.
But now, six billion kilometers to stern, Mission Control turns off the tap and leaves us coasting.  The comet swells in our sights, a frozen enigma sweeping its signal across the sky like a lighthouse beam.  We bring rudimentary senses to bear and stare it down on a thousand wavelengths.  
We've lived for this moment.
We see an erratic wobble that speaks of recent collisions.  We see scars—smooth icy expanses where once-acned skin has liquefied and refrozen, far too recently for the insignificant sun at our backs to be any kind of suspect.
We see an astronomical impossibility: a comet with a heart of refined iron.
Burns-Caufield sings as we glide past.  Not to us; it ignores our passage as it ignored our approach.  It sings to someone else entirely.  Perhaps we'll meet that audience some day.  Perhaps they're waiting in the desolate wastelands ahead of us.  Mission Control flips us onto our backs, keeps us fixed on target past any realistic hope of acquisition.  They send last-ditch instructions, squeeze our fading signals for every last bit among the static.  I can sense their frustration, their reluctance to let us go; once or twice, we're even asked if some judicious mix of thrust and gravity might let us linger here a bit longer. 
But deceleration is for pansies.  We're headed for the stars.  
Bye, Burnsie.  Bye, Mission Control.  Bye, Sol.  
See you at heat death.

*

Warily, we close on target.
There are three of us in the second wave—slower than our predecessors, yes, but still so much faster than anything flesh-constrained.  We are weighed down by payloads which make us virtually omniscient.  We see on every wavelength, from radio to string.  Our autonomous microprobes measure everything our masters anticipated; tiny onboard assembly lines can build tools from the atoms up, to assess the things they did not.  Atoms, scavenged from where we are, join with ions beamed from where we were:  thrust and materiel accumulate in our bellies.
This extra mass has slowed us, but midpoint braking maneuvers have slowed us even more.  The last half of this journey has been a constant fight against momentum from the first.  It is not an efficient way to travel.  In less-hurried times we would have built early to some optimal speed, perhaps slung around a convenient planet for a little extra oomph, coasted most of the way.  But time is pressing, so we burn at both ends.  We must reach our destination; we cannot afford to pass it by, cannot afford the kamikaze exuberance of the first wave.  They merely glimpsed the lay of the land.  We must map it down to the motes.
We must be more responsible.
Now, slowing towards orbit, we see everything they saw and more.  We see the scabs, and the impossible iron core.  We hear the singing.  And there, just beneath the comet's frozen surface, we see structure:  an infiltration of architecture into geology.  We are not yet close enough to squint, and radar is too long in the tooth for fine detail.  But we are smart, and there are three of us, widely separated in space.  The wavelengths of three radar sources can be calibrated to interfere at some predetermined point of convergence—and those tripartite echoes, hologramatically remixed, will increase resolution by a factor of twenty-seven.
Burns-Caulfield stops singing the moment we put our plan into action.  In the next instant I go blind.
It's a temporary aberration, a reflexive amping of filters to compensate for the overload.  My arrays are back online in seconds, diagnostics green within and without.  I reach out to the others, confirm identical experiences, identical recoveries.  We are all still fully functional, unless the sudden increase in ambient ion density is some kind of sensory artefact.  We are ready to continue our investigation of Burns-Caulfield.
The only real problem is that Burns-Caulfield seems to have disappeared...

*

Theseus carried no regular crew—no navigators or engineers, no one to swab the decks, no meat wasted on tasks that machinery orders of mag smaller could perform orders of mag better.  Let superfluous deckhands weigh down other ships, if the nonAscendent hordes needed to attach some pretense of usefulness to their lives.  Let them infest vessels driven only by commercial priorities.  The only reason we were here was because nobody had yet optimized software for First Contact.   Bound past the edge of the solar system, already freighted with the fate of the world, Theseus wasted no mass on self-esteem.
So here we were, rehydrated and squeaky-clean:  Isaac Szpindel, to study the aliens.  The Gang of Four—Susan James and her secondary personae— to talk to them.  Major Amanda Bates was here to fight, if necessary.  And Jukka Sarasti to command us all, to move us like chess pieces on some multidimensional game board that only vampires could see.
He'd arrayed us around a conference table that warped gently through the Commons,  keeping a discreet and constant distance from the curved deck beneath.  The whole drum was furnished in Early Concave, tricked unwary and hung-over brains into thinking they were looking at the world through fisheye lenses.  In deference to the creakiness of the nouveaux undead it spun at a mere fifth of a gee, but it was just warming up.  We'd be at half-grav in six hours, stuck there for eighteen out of every twenty-four until the ship decided we were fully recovered.  For the next few days, free-fall would be a rare and blesséd thing.
Light sculptures appeared on the tabletop.  Sarasti could have fed the information directly to our inlays— the whole briefing could have gone through ConSensus, without the need to assemble physically in the same place— but if you want to be sure everyone's paying attention, you bring them together.
Szpindel leaned in conspiratorially at my side.  "Or maybe the bloodsucker just gets off seeing all this meat in close quarters, eh?"
If Sarasti heard he didn't show it, not even to me.  He pointed to a dark heart at the center of the display, his eyes lost behind black glass.  "Oasa object.  Infrared emitter, methane class." 
On the display it was—nothing.  Our apparent destination was a black disk, a round absence of stars.  In real life it weighed in at over ten Jupiters and measured twenty percent wider at the belly.  It was directly in our path:  too small to burn, too remote for the reflection of distant sunlight, too heavy for a gas giant, too light for a brown dwarf.  
"When did that show up?"  Bates squeezed her rubber ball in one hand, the knuckles whitening.  
"X-ray spike appears during the '76 microwave survey."  Six years before Firefall.  "Never confirmed, never reacquired.  Like a torsion flare from an L-class dwarf, but we should see anything big enough to generate that kind of effect and the sky's dark on that bearing.  IAU calls it a statistical artefact."
Szpindel's eyebrows drew together like courting caterpillers.  "What changed?"
Sarasti smiled faintly, keeping his mouth closed.  "The metabase gets—crowded, after Firefall.  Everyone skittish, looking for clues.  After Burns-Caulfield explodes—"  He clicked at the back of his throat.  "Turns out the spike might arise from a subdwarf object after all, if the magnetosphere's torqued enough."
Bates:  "Torqued by what?"  
"Don't know."   
Layers of statistical inference piled up on the table while Sarasti sketched background:  even with a solid bearing and half the world's attention, the object had hidden from all but the most intensive search.  A thousand telescopic snapshots had been stacked one on another and squeezed through a dozen filters before something emerged from the static, just below the three-meter band and the threshold of certainty.  For the longest time it hadn't even been real:  just a probabilistic ghost until Theseus got close enough to collapse the waveform.  A quantum particle, heavy as ten Jupiters. 
Earthbound cartographers were calling it Big Ben.  Theseus had barely passed Saturn's orbit when it showed up in the residuals.  That discovery would have been moot for anyone else; no other ship caught en route could have packed enough fuel for anything but the long dejected loop back home.  But Theseus' thin, infinitely attenuate fuel line reached all the way back to the sun;  she could turn on the proverbial dime.  We'd changed course in our sleep and the Icarus stream tracked our moves like a cat after prey, feeding us at lightspeed.
And here we were.
"Talk about long shots," Szpindel grumbled.
Across the table, Bates flicked her wrist.  Her ball sailed over my head; I heard it bounce off the deck (not the deck, something in me amended: handrail).   "We're assuming the comet was a deliberate decoy, then."
Sarasti nodded.  The ball riccocheted back into my line of sight high overhead and disappeared briefly behind the spinal bundle, looping through some eccentric, counterintuitive parabola in the drum's feeble grav. 
"So they want to be left alone."
Sarasti steepled his fingers and turned his face in her direction.  "That your recommendation?"
She wished it was.  "No, sir.  I'm just saying that Burns-Caulfield took a lot of resources and effort to set up.  Whoever built it obviously values their anonymity and has the technology to protect it."
The ball bounced one last time and wobbled back towards the Commons.  Bates half-hopped from her seat (she floated briefly), barely catching it on its way past.  There remained a new-born-animal awkwardness to her movements, half Coriolis, half residual rigor.  Still:  a big improvement in four hours.  The rest of the Humans were barely past the walking stage.
"Maybe it wasn't much trouble for them at all, eh?" Szpindel was musing.  "Maybe it was dead easy."
"In which case they might or might not be as xenophobic, but they're even more advanced.  We don't want to rush into this."
Sarasti turned back to the simmering graphics.  "So?"
Bates kneaded the recovered ball with her fingertips.  "The second mouse gets the cheese.  We may have blown our top-of-the-line recon in the Kuiper, but we don't have to go in blind.  Send in our own drones along separate vectors.  Hold off on a close approach until we at least know whether we're dealing with friendlies or hostiles."
James shook her head.  "If they were hostile, they could have packed the Fireflies with antimatter.  Or sent one big object instead of sixty thousand little ones, let the impact take us out."
"The Fireflies only imply an initial curiosity," Bates said.  "Who knows if they liked what they saw?"
"What if this whole diversion theory's just so much shit?" 
I turned, briefly startled.  James's mouth had made the words; Sascha had spoken them.
"You wanna stay hidden, you don't light up the sky with fucking fireworks," she continued.  "You don't need a diversion if nobody's looking for you, and nobody's looking for you if you lie low.  If they were so curious, they could've just snuck in a spycam."
"Risks detection," the vampire said mildly.
"Hate to break it, Jukka, but the Fireflies didn't exactly slip under the rad—"
Sarasti opened his mouth, closed it again.  Filed teeth, briefly visible, clicked audibly behind his face.  Tabletop graphics reflected off his visor, a band of writhing polychrome distortions where eyes should be.
Sascha shut up.
Sarasti continued.  "They trade stealth for speed.  By the time you react, they already have what they want."  He spoke quietly, patiently, a well-fed predator explaining the rules of the game to prey that really should know better:  the longer it takes me to track you down, the more hope you have of escaping.
But Sascha had already fled.  Her surfaces had scattered like a flock of panicked starlings, and the next time Susan James' mouth opened, it was Susan James who spoke through it.  "Sascha's aware of the current paradigm, Jukka.  She's simply worried that it might be wrong."
"Got another we could trade it on?"  Szpindel wondered. "More options?  Longer warranty?"
"I don't know."  James sighed.  "I guess not.  It's just—odd, that they'd want to actively mislead us.  I'd hoped they were merely— well."  She spread her hands.  "Probably no big deal.  I'm sure they'll still be willing to talk, if we handle the introductions right.  We just need to be a little more cautious, perhaps..."
Sarasti unfolded himself from his chair and loomed over us.  "We go in.  What we know weighs against further delay."
Bates frowned and pitched her ball back into orbit.  "Sir, all we actually know is that an Oasa emitter's in our path.  We don't even know if there's anyone there."
"There is," Sarasti said.  "They expect us."
Nobody spoke for a few seconds.  Someone's joints cracked in the silence.
"Er..." Szpindel began.  
Without looking, Sarasti flicked out his arm and snatched Bates' returning ball from the air.  "Ladar pings Theseus four hours forty-eight minutes ago.  We respond with an identical signal.  Nothing.  Probe launches half-hour before we wake up.  We don't go in blind, but we don't wait.  They see us already.  Longer we wait, greater risk of countermeasures."
I looked at the dark featureless placeholder on the table:  bigger than Jupiter and we couldn't even see it yet.  Something in the shadow of that mass had just reached out with casual, unimaginable precision and tapped us on the nose with a laser beam.
This was not going to be an even match.
Szpindel spoke for all of us:  "You knew that all along?  You're telling us now?"
This time Sarasti's smile was wide and toothy.  It was as though a gash had opened in the lower half of his face.
Maybe it was a predator thing.  He just couldn't help playing with his food.

*

It wasn't so much the way they looked.  The elongate limbs, the pale skin, the  canines and the extended mandible—noticeable, yes, even alien, but not disturbing, not frightening.  Not even the eyes, really.  The eyes of dogs and cats shine in the darkness; we don't shiver at the sight.
Not the way they looked.  The way they moved.
Something in the reflexes, maybe.  The way they held their limbs:  like mantis limbs, long jointed things you just knew could reach out and snatch you from right across the room, any time they felt like it.  When Sarasti looked at me—really looked, naked-eyed, unfiltered by the visor— a half-million years just melted away.  The fact that he was extinct meant nothing.  The fact that we'd come so far, grown strong enough to resurrect our own nightmares to serve us...meant nothing.  The genes aren't fooled.  They know what to fear.
Of course, you had to experience it in person.  Robert Paglini knew the theory of vampires down the molecules, but even with all those technical specs in his head he never really got it.
He called me, before we left.  I hadn't been expecting it; ever since the roster had been announced our watches had blocked calls from anyone not explicitly contact-listed.  I'd forgotten that Pag had been.  We hadn't spoken since Chelsea.  I'd given up on ever hearing from him again.
But there he was.  "Pod-man."  He smiled, a tentative overture. 
"It's good to see you," I said, because that's what people said in similar situations. 
"Yeah, well I saw your name in the noose.  You've made it big, for a baseline."
"Not so big."
"Crap.  You're the vanguard of the Human Race.  You're our first, last, and only hope against the unknown.  Man, you showed them."  He held his fist up and shook it, vicariously triumphant.
Showing them had become a cornerstone of Robert Paglino's life.  He'd really made it work for him, too, overcome the handicap of a natural birth with retrofits and enhancements and sheer bloody-mindedness.  In a world in which Humanity had become redundant in unprecedented numbers, we'd both retained the status of another age:  working professional.
"So you're taking orders from a vamp," he said now.  "Talk about fighting fire with fire."
"I guess it's practice.  Until we run up against the real thing."
He laughed.  I couldn't imagine why.  But I smiled back anyway.
It was good to see him.
"So, what are they like?" Pag asked.
"Vampires?  I don't know.  Just met my first one yesterday."
"And?"
"Hard to read.  Didn't even seem to be aware of his surroundings sometimes, he seemed to be... off in his own little world."
"He's aware all right.  Those things are so fast it's scary.  You know they can hold both aspects of a Necker cube in their heads at the same time?"
The term rang a bell.  I subtitled, and saw the thumbnail of a familiar wireframe box:

Now I remembered; classic ambiguous illusion.  Sometimes the shaded panel seemed to be in front, sometimes behind.  The perspective flipped back and forth as you watched.
"You or I, we can only see it one way or the other," Pag said.  "Vamps see it both ways at once.  Do you have any idea what kind of an edge that gives 'em?"
"Not enough of one."
"Touché.  But hey, not their fault neutral traits get fixed in small populations."
"I don't know if I'd call the Crucifix glitch neutral."
"It was at first.  How many intersecting right angles do you see in nature?"  He waved one dismissive hand.  "Anyway, that's not the point.  The point is they can do something that's neurologically impossible for us Humans.  They can hold simultaneous multiple worldviews, Pod-man.  They just see things we have to work out step-by-step, they don't have to think about it.  You know, there isn't a single baseline human who could just tell you, just off the top of their heads, every prime number between one and a billion?  In the old days, only a few autistics could do shit like that."
"He never uses the past tense," I murmered.
"Huh?  Oh, that."  Pag nodded.  "They never experience the past tense.  It's just another thread to them.  They don't remember stuff, they relive it."
"What, like a post-traumatic flashback?"
"Not so traumatic." He grimaced.  "Not for them, at least."
"So this is obviously your current hot spot?  Vampires?"
"Pod, vampires are the capital-Hot spot for anyone with a 'neuro' in their c.v.  I'm just doing a couple of histology papers.  Pattern-matching receptors, Mexican-hat arrays, reward/irrelevance filters.  The eyes, basically."
"Right."  I hesitated.  "Those kind of throw you."
"No shit."  Pag nodded knowingly.  "That tap lucidum of theirs, that shine.  Scary."  He shook his head, impressed all over again at the recollection.
"You've never met one," I surmised.
"What, in the flesh?  I'd give my left ball.  Why?"
"It's not the shine.  It's the—"  I groped for a word that fit— "The attitude, maybe."
"Yeah," he said after a bit.  "I guess sometimes you've just gotta be there, huh?  Which is why I envy you, Pod-man."
"You shouldn't."
"I should.  Even if you never meet whoever sent the 'Flies, you're in for one Christly research opportunity with that—Sarasti, is it?"
"Wasted on me.  The only neuro in my file's under medical history."
He laughed.  "Anyway, like I said,  I just saw your name in the headlines and I figured, hey, the man's leaving in a couple of months, I should probably stop waiting around for him to call."
It had been over two years.  "I didn't think I'd get through.  I thought you'd shitlisted me."
"Nah.  Never."  He looked down, though, and fell silent.
"But you should have called her," he said at last.
"I know."
"She was dying.  You should've—"
"There wasn't time."
He let the lie sit there for a while.
"Anyway," he said at last.  "I just wanted to wish you luck."  Which wasn't exactly true either.
"Thanks.  I appreciate that."
"Kick their alien asses.  If aliens have asses."
"There's five of us, Pag.  Nine if you count the backups.  We're not exactly an army."
"Just an expression, fellow mammal.  Bury the hatchet.  Damn the torpedoes.  Soothe the serpent."
Raise the white flag, I thought. 
"I guess you're busy," he said,  "I'll—"
"Look, you want to get together?  In airspace?  I haven't been to QuBit's in a while."
"Love to, Pod.  Unfortunately I'm in Mankoya.  Splice'n'dice workshop."
"What, you mean physically?"
"Cutting-edge research.  Old-school habits."
"Too bad."
"Anyway, I'll let you go.  Just wanted, you know—"
"Thanks," I said again.
"So, you know.  Bye,"  Robert Paglino told me.  Which was, when you got down to it, the reason he'd called.
He wasn't expecting another chance.

*

Pag blamed me for the way it had ended with Chelsea.  Fair enough.  I blamed him for the way it began.
He'd gone into neuroeconomics at least partly because his childhood buddy had turned into a pod person before his eyes.  I'd ended up in Synthesis for roughly the same reason.  Our paths had diverged, and we didn't see each other in the flesh all that often; but two decades after I'd brutalized a handful of children on his behalf, Robert Paglino was still my best and only friend.
"You need to seriously thaw out," he told me, "And I know just the lady to handle the oven mitts."
"That is perhaps the worst use of metaphor in the history of human language," I said.
"Seriously, Pod.  She'll be good for you.  A, a counterbalance—ease you a bit closer to the comfy mean, you know?"
"No, Pag, I don't.  What is she, another neuroeconomist?"
"Neuroaestheticist," he said.
"There's still a market for those?"  I couldn't imagine how; why pay to tweak your compatibility with some significant other, when significant others themselves were so out of fashion?
"Not much of one," Pag admitted.  "Fact is, she's pretty much retired.  But she's still got the tools, my man. Very thigmotactic.  Likes all her relationships face-to-face and in the flesh."
"I dunno, Pag.  Sounds like work."
"Not like your work.  She's got to be easier than the bleeding composites you front for.  She's smart, she's sexy, and she's nicely inside the standard deev except for the personal contact thing.  Which is not so much outright perversion as charming fetish.  In your case it could even be therapeutic."
"If I wanted therapy I'd see a therapist."
"She does a bit of that too, actually."
"Yeah?"  And then, despite myself, "Any good?"
He looked me up and down.  "No one's that good.  That's not what this is.  I just figured you two would click.  Chelse is one of the few who might not be completely put off by your intimacy issues."
"Everyone's got intimacy issues these days, in case you hadn't noticed."  He must have; the population had been dropping for decades.
"I was being euphemistic.  I meant your aversion to general Human contact."
"Making it euphemistic to call you Human?"
He grinned.  "Different deal.  We got history."
"No thanks."
"Too late.  She's already en route to the appointed place."
"Appoin—you're an asshole, Pag."
"The tightest."
Which was how I found myself intrusively face-to-face in an airspace lounge south of Beth and Bear.  The lighting was low and indirect, creeping from under seats and the edges of tables; the chromatics, this afternoon at least, were defiantly longwave.  It was a place where baselines could pretend to see in infrared.
So I pretended for a moment, assessing the woman in the corner booth:  gangly and glorious, half-a-dozen ethnicities coexisting peacefully with no single voice dominant.  Something glowed on her cheek, a faint emerald staccato against the ambient red shift. Her hair floated in a diffuse ebony cloud about her head;  as I neared I caught occasional glints of metal within that nimbus, the threads of a static generator purveying the illusion of weightlessness.  In normal light her blood-red skin would doubtless shift down to the fashionable butterscotch of the unrepentant mongrel.
She was attractive, but so was everyone in this kind of light; the longer the wavelength, the softer the focus.  There's a reason fuckcubbies don't come with fluorescent lights.
You will not fall for this, I told myself.
"Chelsea," she said.  Her little finger rested on one of the table's inset trickle-chargers.   "Former neuroaestheticist, presently a parasite on the Body Economic thanks to genes and machines on the cutting edge."
The glow on her cheek flapped bright lazy wings:  a tattoo, a bioluminescent butterfly.  
"Siri," I said.  "Freelance synthesist, indentured servant to the genes and machines that turned you into a parasite."
She waved at the empty seat.  I took it, assessing the system before me, sizing up the best approach for a fast yet diplomatic disconnect.  The set of her shoulders told me she enjoyed lightscapes, and was embarrassed to admit it.  Monahan was her favorite artist.  She thought herself a natural girl because she'd stayed on chemical libidinals all these years, even though a synaptic edit would have been simpler.  She revelled in her own inconsistency: a woman whose professional machinery edited thought itself, yet mistrustful of the dehumanising impact of telephones.  Innately affectionate, and innately afraid of unreturned affection, and indomitably unwilling to let any of that stop her.
She liked what she saw when looked at me.  She was a little afraid of that, too.
Chelsea gestured at my side of the table.  The touchpads there glowed soft, dissonant sapphire in the bloody light, like a set of splayed fingerprints.   "Good dope here.  Extra hydroxyl on the ring, or something."
Assembly-line neuropharm doesn't do much for me; it's optimized for people with more meat in their heads.  I fingered one of the pads for appearances, and barely felt the tingle.
"So.  A Synthesist.  Explaining the Incomprehensible to the Indifferent."
I smiled on cue.  "More like bridging the gap between the people who make the breakthroughs and the people who take the credit for them."
She smiled back. "So how do you do it?  All those optimized frontal lobes and refits—I mean, if they're incomprehensible, how do you comprehend them?"
"It helps to find pretty much everyone else incomprehensible too.  Provides experience."  There.  That should force a bit of distance.
It didn't.  She thought I was joking.  I could see her lining up to push for more details, to ask questions about what I did, which would lead to questions about me, which would lead—
"Tell  me what it's like," I said smoothly,  "rewiring people's heads for a living."  
Chelsea grimaced; the butterfly on her cheek fluttered nervously at the motion, wings brightening.  "God, you make it sound like we turn them into zombies or something.  They're just tweaks, mainly.  Changing taste in music or cuisine, you know, optimizing mate compatibility.  It's all completely reversible."
"There aren't drugs for that?"
"Nah.  Too much developmental variation between brains; our targeting is really fine-scale.  But it's not all microsurgery and fried synapses, you know.   You'd be surprised how much rewiring can be done noninvasively.  You can start all sorts of cascades just by playing certain sounds in the right order, or showing images with the right balance of geometry and emotion."
"I assume those are new techniques."
"Not really.  Rhythm and music hang their hats on the same basic principle.  We just turned art into science."
"Yeah, but when?"  The recent past, certainly.  Sometime within the past twenty years or so—
Her voice grew suddenly quiet.  "Robert told me about your operation.  Some kind of  viral epilepsy, right?  Back when you were just a tyke."
I'd never explicitly asked him to keep it a secret.  What was the difference anyway?  I'd made a full recovery.
Besides, Pag still thought that had happened to someone else. 
"I don't know your specifics," Chelsea continued gently. "But from the sound of it, noninvasive techniques wouldn't have helped.  I'm sure they only did what they had to."
I tried to suppress the thought, and couldn't:  I like this woman.
I felt something then, a strange, unfamiliar sensation that somehow loosened my vertebrae.  The chair felt subtly, indefinably more comfortable at my back. 
"Anyway."  My silence had thrown her off-stride.  "Haven't done it much since the bottom dropped out of the market.  But it did leave me with a fondness for face-to-face encounters, if you know what I mean."
"Yeah.  Pag said you took your sex in the first-person."
She nodded.  "I'm very old-school.  You okay with that?"
I wasn't certain.  I was a virgin in the real world, one of the few things I still had in common with the rest of civilized society.  "In principle, I guess.  It just seems—a lot of effort for not as much payoff, you know?"
"Don't I."  She smiled.  "Real fuckbuddies aren't airbrushed.  Got all these needs and demands that you can't edit out.  How can you blame anyone for saying no thanks to all that, now there's a choice?  You gotta wonder how our parents ever stayed together sometimes."
You gotta wonder why they did.  I felt myself sinking deeper into the chair, wondered again at this strange new sensation.  Chelsea had said the dopamine was tweaked.  That was probably it.
She leaned forward, not coy, not coquettish, not breaking eye contact for an instant in the longwave gloom.  I could smell the lemony tang of  pheromones and synthetics mingling on her skin.  "But there are advantages too, once you learn the moves," she said.  "The body's got a long memory. And you do realize that there's no trickler under your left finger there, don't you, Siri?"
I looked.  My left arm was slightly extended, index finger touching one of the trickle pads; and my right had mirrored the motion while I wasn't watching, its own finger tapping uselessly on blank tabletop.
I pulled it back.  "Bit of a bilateral twitch," I admitted.  "The body creeps into symmetrical poses when I'm not looking."
I waited for a joke, or at least a raised eyebrow.  Chelsea just nodded and resumed her thread.  "So if you're game for this, so am I.  I've never been entangled with a synthesist before."
"Jargonaut's fine.  I'm not proud."
"Don't you just always know just exactly what to say."  She cocked her head at me.  "So, your name.  What's it mean?"
Relaxed.  That was it.  I felt relaxed.
"I don't know.  It's just a name."  
"Well, it's not good enough.  If we're gonna to be swapping spit for any length of time you've gotta get a name that means something."
And we were, I realized.  Chelsea had decided while I wasn't looking.  I could have stopped her right there, told her what a bad idea this was, apologized for any misunderstanding.  But then there'd be wounded looks and hurt feelings and guilt because after all, if I wasn't interested why the hell had I even shown up?
She seemed nice.  I didn't want to hurt her.
Just for a while, I told myself.  It'll be an experience.
"I think I'll call you Cygnus," Chelsea said.
"The swan?" I said.  A bit precious, but it could have been worse.
She shook her head.  "Black hole.  Cygnus X-1."
I furrowed my brow at her, but I knew exactly what she meant:  a dark, dense object that sucks up the light and destroys everything in its path.
"Thanks a whole fucking lot.  Why?"
"I'm not sure.  Something dark about you."  She shrugged, and gave me a great toothy grin.  "But it's not unattractive.  And let me give you a tweak or two, I bet you'd grow right out of it."
Pag admitted afterward, a bit sheepishly, that maybe I should have read that as a warning sign.  Live and learn.

"Leaders are visionaries with a poorly developed sense of fear
and no concept of the odds against them."
—Robert Jarvik

Our scout fell towards orbit, watching Ben.  We fell days behind, watching the scout.  And that was all we did:  sit in Theseus' belly while the system streamed telemetry to our inlays.  Essential, irreplaceable, mission-critical—we might as well have been ballast during that first approach.
We passed Ben's Rayleigh limit.  Theseus squinted at a meager emission spectrum and saw a rogue halo element from Canis Major—a dismembered remnant of some long-lost galaxy that had drifted into ours and ended up as road kill, uncounted billions of years ago.  We were closing on something from outside the Milky Way.
The probe arced down and in, drew close enough for false-color enhance.  Ben's surface brightened to a seething parfait of high-contrast bands against a diamond-hard starscape.  Something twinkled there, faint sparkles on endless overcast. 
"Lightning?" James wondered.
Szpindel shook his head.  "Meteorites.  Must be a lot of rock in the neighborhood."
"Wrong color," Sarasti said.  He was not physically among us—he was back in his tent, hardlined into the Captain—but ConSensus put him anywhere on board he wanted to be.
Morphometrics scrolled across my inlays:  mass,  diameter,  mean density.  Ben's day lasted seven hours twelve minutes.  Diffuse but massive accretion belt circling the equator, more torus than ring, extending almost a half-million kilometers from the cloud-tops: the pulverized corpses of moons perhaps, ground down to leftovers. 
"Meteorites."  Szpindel grinned. "Told ya."
He seemed to be right; increasing proximity smeared many of those pinpoint sparkles into bright ephemeral hyphens, scratching the atmosphere.  Closer to the poles, cloud bands flickered with dim, intermittent flashes of electricity.
Weak radio emission peaks at 31 and 400m. Outer atmosphere heavy with methane and ammonia; lithium, water, carbon monoxide in abundance.  Ammonia hydrogen sulfide, alkali halide mixing locally in those torn swirling clouds.  Neutral alkalis in the upper layers.  By now even Theseus could pick those things out from a distance, but our scout was close enough to see filigree.  It no longer saw a disk.  It gazed down at a dark convex wall in seething layers of red and brown, saw faint stains of anthracene and pyrene.
One of a myriad meteorite contrails scorched Ben's face directly ahead; for a moment I thought I could even see the tiny dark speck at its core, but sudden static scratched the feed.    Bates cursed softly.  The image blurred, then steadied as the probe pitched its voice higher up the spectrum.  Unable to make itself heard above the longwave din, now it spoke down a laser.
And still it stuttered.  Keeping it aligned across a million fluctuating kilometers should have been should have posed no problem at all; our respective trajectories were known parabolas, our relative positions infinitely predictable at any time t.  But the meteorite's contrail jumped and skittered on the feed, as if the beam were being repeatedly, infinitesimally knocked out of alignment.  Incandescent gas blurred its details; I doubted that even a rock-steady image would have offered any sharp edges for a human eye to hold on to.  Still.  There was something wrong about it somehow, something about the tiny black dot at the core of that fading brightness.  Something that some primitive part of my mind refused to accept as natural—
The image lurched again, and flashed to black, and didn't return.
"Probe's fried," Bates reported.  "Spike there at the end.  Like it hit a Parker Spiral, but with a really tight wind."
I didn't need to call up subtitles.  It was obvious in the set of her face, the sudden creases between her eyebrows:  she was talking about a magnetic field.
"It's—" she began, and stopped as a number popped up in ConSensus:  11.2 Tesla.
"Holy shit," Szpindel whispered. "Is that right?"
Sarasti clicked from the back of his throat and the back of the ship.  A moment later he served up an instant replay, those last few seconds of telemetry zoomed and smoothed and contrast-enhanced from visible light down to deep infrared.  There was that same dark shard cauled in flame, there was the contrail burning in its wake.  Now it dimmed as the object skipped off the denser atmosphere beneath and regained altitude.  Within moments the heat trace had faded entirely.  The thing that had burned at its center rose back into space, a fading ember.  A great conic scoop at its front end gaped like a mouth.  Stubby fins disfigured an ovoid abdomen.
Ben lurched and went out all over again.
"Meteorites," Bates said dryly.
The thing had left me with no sense of scale.  It could have been an insect or an asteroid. "How big?" I whispered, a split-second before the answer appeared on my inlays:  
Four hundred meters along the major axis.
Ben was safely distant in our sights once more, a dark dim disk centered in Theseus's forward viewfinder.  But I remembered the close-up:  a twinkling orb of black-hearted fires; a face gashed and pockmarked, endlessly wounded, endlessly healing.
There'd been thousands of the things.
Theseus shivered along her length.  It was just a pulse of decelerating thrust; but for that one moment, I imagined I knew how she felt.

*

We headed in and hedged our bets.
Theseus weaned herself with a ninety-eight-second burn, edged us into some vast arc that might, with a little effort, turn into an orbit—or into a quick discreet flyby if the neighborhood turned out to be a little too rough.  The Icarus stream fell invisibly to port, its unswerving energy lost to space-time.  Our city-sized, molecule-thick parasol wound down and packed itself away until the next time the ship got thirsty.  Antimatter stockpiles began dropping immediately; this time we were alive to watch it happen.  The dip was infinitesimal, but there was something disquieting about the sudden appearance of that minus sign on the display.
We could have retained the apron strings, left a buoy behind in the telematter stream to bounce energy down the well after us.  Susan James wondered why we hadn't.
"Too risky," Sarasti said, without elaboration.
Szpindel leaned in James' direction.  "Why give 'em something else to shoot at, eh?"
We sent more probes ahead, though, spat them out hard and fast and too fuel-constrained for anything but flyby and self-destruct.  They couldn't take their eyes off the machines swinging around Big Ben.  Theseus stared her own unblinking stare, more distant though more acute.  But if those high divers even knew we were out there, they ignored us completely.  We tracked them across the closing distance, watched them swoop and loop though a million parabolas at a million angles.  We never saw them collide—not with each other, not with the cauldron of rock tumbling around Ben's equator.  Every perigee dipped briefly into atmosphere; there they burned, and slowed, and accelerated back into space, their anterior scoops glowing with residual heat.  
Bates grabbed a ConSensus image, drew highlights and a conclusion around the front end:  "Scramjet."
We tracked nearly four hundred thousand in less than two days.  That appeared to be most of them; new sightings leveled off afterwards, the cumulative curve flattening towards some theoretical asymptote.  Most of the orbits were close and fast, but Sarasti projected a frequency distribution extending almost back to Pluto.  We might stay out here for years, and still catch the occasional new shovelnose returning from its extended foray into the void. 
"The faster ones are pulling over fifty gees on the hairpin turn," Szpindel pointed out.  "Meat couldn't handle that.  I say they're unmanned."
"Meat's reinforceable," Sarasti said.
"If it's got that much scaffolding you might as well stop splitting hairs and call it a machine anyway."
Surface morphometrics were absolutely uniform.  Four hundred thousand divers, every one identical.  If there was an alpha male calling the shots among the herd, it couldn't be distinguished on sight.
One night—as such things were measured on board— I followed a soft squeal of tortured electronics up to the observation blister.  Szpindel floated there, watching the skimmers.  He'd closed the clamshells, blocked off the stars and built a little analytical nest in their place.  Graphs and windows spilled across the inside of the dome as though the virtual space in Szpindel's head was insufficient to contain them.  Tactical graphics lit him from all sides, turned his body into a bright patchwork of flickering tattoos.
The Illustrated Man. "Mind if I come in?"  I asked.
He grunted:  Yeah, but not enough to push it.
Inside the dome, the sound of heavy rainfall hissed and spat behind the screeching that had led me here.  "What is that?"
"Ben's magnetosphere."  He didn't look back.  "Nice, eh?"
Synthesists don't have opinions on the job; it keeps observer effects to a minimum.  This time I permitted myself a small breach.  "The static's nice.  I could do without the screeching."
"Are you kidding?  That's the music of the spheres, commissar.  It's beautiful. Like old jazz."
"I never got the hang of that either."
He shrugged and squelched the upper register, left the rain pattering around us.  His jiggling eyes fixed on some arcane graphic.  "Want a scoop for your notes?" 
"Sure."
"There you go."  Light reflected off his feedback glove, iridescing like the wing of a dragonfly as he pointed:  an absorption spectrum, a looped time-series.  Bright peaks surged and subsided, surged and subsided across a fifteen-second timeframe.
Subtitles only gave me wavelengths and Angstroms.  "What is it?"
"Diver farts.  Those bastards are dumping complex organics into the atmosphere."
"How complex?"
"Hard to tell, so far.  Faint traces, and they dissipate like that.  But sugars and aminos at least.  Maybe proteins.  Maybe more."
"Maybe life? Microbes?"  An alien terraforming project...
"Depends on how you define life, eh?" Szpindel said.  "Not even Deinococcus would last long down there.  But it's a big atmosphere.  They better not be in any hurry if they're reworking the whole thing by direct inoculation."
If they were, the job would go a lot faster with self-replicating inoculates.  "Sounds like life to me."
"Sounds like agricultural aerosols, is what it sounds like.  Those fuckers are turning the whole damn gas ball into a rice paddy bigger than Jupiter."  He gave me a scary grin.  "Something's got a beeeg appetite, hmm?  You gotta wonder if we aren't gonna be a teeny bit outnumbered."

*

Szpindel's findings were front and center at our next get-together.
The vampire summed it up for us, visual aids dancing on the table:  "Von Neumann self-replicating r-selector.  Seed washes up and sprouts skimmers, skimmers harvest raw materials from the accretion belt.  Some perturbations in those orbits; belt's still unsettled."
"Haven't seen any of the herd giving birth," Szpindel remarked.  "Any sign of a factory?"
Sarasti shook his head.  "Discarded, maybe.  Decompiled.  Or the herd stops breeding at optimal N." 
"These are only the bulldozers," Bates pointed out.  "There'll be tenants."
"A lot of 'em, eh?" Szpindel added.  "Outnumber us by orders of mag."
James:  "But they might not show up for centuries."
Sarasti clicked.  "Do these skimmers build Fireflies?  Burns-Caulfield?"
It was a rhetorical question.  Szpindel answered anyway:  "Don't see how."
"Something else does, then.  Something already local."
Nobody spoke for a moment.  James' topology shifted and shuffled in the silence; when she opened her mouth again, someone indefinably younger was on top.
"Their habitat isn't anything like ours, if they're building a home way out here.  That's hopeful."
Michelle.  The synesthete.
"Proteins."  Sarasti's eyes were unreadable behind the visor.  Comparable biochemistries.  They might eat us.
"Whoever these beings are, they don't even live in sunlight.    No territorial overlap, no resource overlap, no basis for conflict.  There's no reason we shouldn't get along just fine."
"On the other hand," Szpindel said, "Technology implies belligerence."
Michelle snorted softly.  "According to a coterie of theoretical historians who've never actually met an alien, yes.  Maybe now we get to prove them wrong."  And in the next instant she was just gone, her affect scattered like leaves in a dust-devil, and Susan James was back in her place saying:
"Why don't we just ask them?"
"Ask?" Bates said.
"There are four hundred thousand machines out there.  How do we know they can't talk?"
"We'd have heard.," Szpindel said.  "They're drones."
"Can't hurt to ping them, just to make sure."
"There's no reason they should talk even if they are smart.  Language and intelligence aren't all that strongly correlated even on Ear—"
James rolled her eyes.  "Why not try, at least?  It's what we're here for.  It's what I'm here for.  Just send a bloody signal."
After a moment Bates picked up the ball.  "Bad game theory, Suze."
"Game theory."  She made it sound like a curse.
"Tit-for-tat's the best strategy.  They pinged us, we pinged back.  Ball's in their court now;  we send another signal, we may give away too much."
"I know the rules, Amanda.  They say if the other party never takes the initiative again, we ignore each other for the rest of the mission because game theory says you don't want to look needy."
"The rule only applies when you're going up against an unknown player, " the Major explained.  "We'll have more options the more we learn."
James sighed.  "It's just—you all seem to be going into this assuming they'll be hostile.  As if a simple hailing signal is going to bring them down on us."
Bates shrugged.  "It only makes sense to be cautious.  I may be a jarhead but I'm not eager to piss off anything that hops between stars and terraforms superJovians for a living.  I don't have to remind anyone here that Theseus is no warship."
She'd said anyone; she'd meant Sarasti.  And Sarasti, focused on his own horizon, didn't answer.  Not out loud, at least; but his surfaces spoke in a different tongue entirely.
Not yet, they said.

*

Bates was right, by the way.  Theseus was officially tricked out for exploration, not combat.  No doubt our masters would have preferred to load her up with nukes and particle cannons as well as her scientific payload, but not even a telemattered fuel stream can change the laws of inertia.  A weaponized prototype would have taken longer to build; a more massive one, laden with heavy artillery, would take longer to accelerate.  Time, our masters had decided, was of greater essence than armament.  In a pinch our fabrication facilities could build most anything we needed, given time.  It might take a while to build a particle-beam cannon from scratch, and we might have to scavenge a local asteroid for the raw material, but we could do it.  Assuming our enemies would be willing to wait, in the interests of fair play. 
But what were the odds that even our best weapons would prove effective against the intelligence that had pulled off the Firefall?  If the unknown was hostile, we were probably doomed no matter what we did.  The Unknown was technologically advanced—and there were some who claimed that that made them hostile by definition.  Technology Implies Belligerence, they said.  
I suppose I should explain that, now that it's completely irrelevant.  You've probably forgotten after all this time.
Once there were three tribes.   The Optimists, whose patron saints were Drake and Sagan, believed in a universe crawling with gentle intelligence—spiritual brethren vaster and more enlightened than we, a great galactic siblinghood into whose ranks we would someday ascend.  Surely, said the Optimists,  space travel implies enlightenment, for it requires the control of great destructive energies.  Any race which can't rise above its own brutal instincts will wipe itself out long before it learns to bridge the interstellar gulf. 
Across from the Optimists sat the Pessimists, who genuflected before graven images of Saint Fermi and a host of lesser lightweights.  The Pessimists envisioned a lonely universe full of dead rocks and prokaryotic slime.  The odds are just too low, they insisted.  Too many rogues, too much radiation, too much eccentricity in too many orbits.  It is a surpassing miracle that even one Earth exists; to hope for many is to abandon reason and embrace religious mania.  After all, the universe is fourteen billion years old:  if the galaxy were alive with intelligence, wouldn't it be here by now?  
Equidistant to the other two tribes sat the Historians.  They didn't have too many thoughts on the probable prevalence of intelligent, spacefaring extraterrestrials— but if there are any, they said, they're not just going to be smart.  They're going to be mean.
It might seem almost too obvious a conclusion.  What is Human history, if not an ongoing succession of greater technologies grinding lesser ones beneath their boots?  But the subject wasn't merely Human history, or the unfair advantage that tools gave to any given side; the oppressed snatch up advanced weaponry as readily as the oppressor, given half a chance.  No, the real issue was how those tools got there in the first place.  The real issue was what tools are for.
To the Historians, tools existed for only one reason:  to force the universe into unnatural shapes.  They treated nature as an enemy, they were by definition a rebellion against the way things were.  Technology is a stunted thing in benign environments, it never thrived in any culture gripped by belief in natural harmony.  Why invent fusion reactors if your climate is comfortable, if your food is abundant?  Why build fortresses if you have no enemies?  Why force change upon a world which poses no threat?
Human civilization had a lot of branches, not so long ago.  Even into the twenty-first century, a few isolated tribes had barely developed stone tools.  Some settled down with agriculture.  Others weren't content until they had ended nature itself, still others until they'd built cities in space.
We all rested eventually, though.  Each new technology trampled lesser ones, climbed to some complacent asymptote, and stopped—until my own mother packed herself away like a larva in honeycomb, softened by machinery, robbed of incentive by her own contentment. 
But history never said that everyone had to stop where we did.  It only suggested that those who had stopped no longer struggled for existence.  There could be other, more hellish worlds where the best Human technology would crumble, where the environment was still the enemy, where the only survivors were those who fought back with sharper tools and stronger empires.  The threats contained in those environments would not be simple ones.  Harsh weather and natural disasters either kill you or they don't, and once conquered—or adapted to— they lose their relevance.  No, the only environmental factors that continued to matter were those that fought back, that countered new strategies with newer ones, that forced their enemies to scale ever-greater heights just to stay alive.  Ultimately, the only enemy that mattered was an intelligent one.
And if the best toys do end up in the hands of those who've never forgotten that life itself is an act of war against intelligent opponents, what does that say about a race whose machines travel between the stars?
The argument was straightforward enough.  It might even have been enough to carry the Historians to victory—if such debates were ever settled on the basic of logic, and if a bored population hadn't already awarded the game to Fermi on points.  But the Historian paradigm was just too ugly, too Darwinian, for most people, and besides, no one really cared any more.  Not even the Cassidy Survey's late-breaking discoveries changed much.  So what if some dirtball at Ursae Majoris Eridani had an oxygen atmosphere?  It was forty-three lightyears away, and it wasn't talking; and if you wanted flying chandeliers and alien messiahs, you could build them to order in Heaven.  If you wanted testosterone and target practice you could choose an afterlife chock-full of nasty alien monsters with really bad aim.  If the mere thought of an alien intelligence threatened your worldview, you could explore a virtual galaxy of empty real estate, ripe and waiting for any God-fearing earthly pilgrims who chanced by.
It was all there, just the other side of a fifteen-minute splice job and a cervical socket.  Why endure the cramped and smelly confines of real-life space travel to go visit pond scum on Europa?
And so, inevitably, a fourth Tribe arose, a Heavenly host that triumphed over all:  the Tribe that Just Didn't Give A Shit.  They didn't know what to do when the Fireflies showed up.
So they sent us, and—in belated honor of the Historian mantra—they sent along a warrior, just in case.  It was doubtful in the extreme that any child of Earth would be a match for a race with interstellar technology, should they prove unfriendly.  Still, I could tell that Bates' presence was a comfort, to the Human members of the crew at least.  If you have to go up unarmed against an angry T-rex with a four-digit IQ,  it can't hurt to have a trained combat specialist at your side.
At the very least, she might be able to fashion a pointy stick from the branch of some convenient tree.

*

"I swear,  if the aliens end up eating the lot of us, we'll have the Church of Game Theory to thank for it," Sascha said.
She was grabbing a brick of couscous from the galley.  I was there for the caffeine.  We were more or less alone; the rest of the crew was strewn from dome to Fab.
"Linguists don't use it?" I knew some that did.
"We don't."  And the others are hacks.  "Thing about game theory is, it assumes rational self-interest among the players.  And people just aren't rational."
"It used to assume that," I allowed.  "These days they factor in the social neurology."
"Human social neurology."  She bit a corner off her brick, spoke around a mouthful of semolina.  "That's what game theory's good for.  Rational players, or human ones.  And let me take a wild stab here and wonder if either of those is gonna apply to that."  She waved her hand at some archetypal alien lurking past the bulkhead.
"It's got its limitations," I admitted.  "I guess you use the tools you can lay your hands on."
Sascha snorted.  "So if you couldn't get your hands on a proper set of blueprints, you'd base your dream home on a book of dirty limericks."
"Maybe not."  And then, a bit defensive in spite of myself, I added, "I've found it useful, though.  In areas you might not expect it to be."
"Yeah?  Name one."
"Birthdays," I said, and immediately wished I hadn't.
Sascha stopped chewing.  Something behind her eyes flickered, almost strobed, as if her other selves were pricking up their ears.
"Go on," she said, and I could feel the whole Gang listening in.
"It's nothing, really.  Just an example."
"So.  Tell us."  Sascha cocked James' head at me.
I shrugged.  No point making a big thing out of it.  "Well, according to game theory, you you should never tell anyone when your birthday is."
"I don't follow."
"It's a lose-lose proposition.  There's no winning strategy."
"What do you mean, strategy?  It's a birthday."
Chelsea had said exactly the same thing when I'd tried to explain it to her.  Look, I'd said, say you tell everyone when it is and nothing happens.  It's kind of a slap in the face.
Or suppose they throw you a party, Chelsea had replied.
Then you don't know whether they're doing it sincerely, or if your earlier interaction just guilted them into observing an occasion they'd rather have ignored.  But if you don't tell anyone, and nobody commemorates the event, there's no reason to feel badly because after all, nobody knew.  And if someone does buy you a drink then you know it's sincere because nobody would go to all the trouble of finding out when your birthday is— and then celebrating it—if they didn't honestly like you.
Of course, the Gang was more up to speed on such things.  I didn't have to explain it verbally:  I could just grab a piece of ConSensus and plot out the payoff matrix,  Tell/Don't Tell along the columns, Celebrated/Not Celebrated along the rows, the unassailable black-and-white logic of cost and benefit in the squares themselves.  The math was irrefutable:  the one winning strategy was concealment.  Only fools revealed their birthdays.  
Sascha looked at me.  "You ever show this to anyone else?"
"Sure.  My girlfriend."
Her eyebrows lifted.  "You had a girlfriend?  A real one?"
I nodded.  "Once."
"I mean after you showed this to her."
"Well, yes."
"Uh huh."  Her eyes wandered back to the payoff matrix.  "Just curious, Siri.  How did she react?"
"She didn't, really.  Not at first.  Then—well, she laughed."
"Better woman than me." Sascha shook her head.  "I'd have dumped you on the spot."

*

My nightly constitutional up the spine:  glorious dreamy flight along a single degree of freedom.  I sailed through hatches and corridors, threw my arms wide and spun in the gentle cyclonic breezes of the drum.  Bates ran circles around me, bouncing her ball against bins and bulkheads, stretching to field each curving rebound in the torqued pseudograv.  The toy ricocheted off a stairwell and out of reach as I passed; the major's curses followed me through the needle's eye from crypt to bridge.
I braked just short of the dome, stopped by the sound of quiet voices from ahead.
"Of course they're beautiful,"  Szpindel murmured.  "They're stars."
"And I'm guessing I'm not your first choice to share the view," James said.
"You're a close second.  But I've got a date with Meesh."
"She never mentioned it."
"She doesn't tell you everything.  Ask her." 
"Hey, this body's taking its antilibs.  Even if yours isn't."
"Mind out of the gutter, Suze.  Eros is only one kind of love, eh?  Ancient Greeks recognized four."
"Riiight." Definitely not Susan, not any more.  "Figures you'd take your lead from a bunch of sodomites."
"Fuck, Sascha.  All I'm asking is a few minutes alone with Meesh before the whip starts cracking again..."
"My body too, Ike.  You wanna pull your eyes over my wool?"
"I just want to talk, eh?  Alone.  That too much to ask?"
I heard Sascha take a breath.  
I heard Michelle let it out. 
"Sorry, kid.  You know the Gang."
"Thank God.  It's like some group inspection whenever I come looking for face time." 
"I guess you're lucky they like you, then."
"I still say you ought to stage a coup."
"You could always move in with us."
I heard the rustle of bodies in gentle contact.  "How are you?" Szpindel asked.  "You okay?"
"Pretty good. I think I'm finally used to being alive again.  You?"
"Hey, I'm a spaz no matter how long I've been dead."
"You get the job done."
"Why, merci.  I try."
A small silence.  Theseus hummed quietly to herself.
"Mom was right," Michelle said.  "They are beautiful."
"What do you see, when you look at them?"  And then, catching himself: "I mean—"
"They're—prickly," Michelle told him.  "When I turn my head it's like bands of very fine needles rolling across my skin in waves.  But it doesn't hurt at all.  It just tingles.  It's almost electric.  It's nice."
"Wish I could feel it that way."
"You've got the interface.  Just patch a camera into your parietal lobe instead of your visual cortex."
"That'd just tell me how a machine feels vision, eh?  Still wouldn't know how you do."
"Isaac Szpindel.  You're a romantic."
"Nah."
"You don't want to know.  You want to keep it mysterious."
"Already got more than enough mystery to deal with out here, in case you hadn't noticed."
"Yeah, but we can't do anything about that."
"That'll change.  We'll be working our asses off in no time."
"You think?"
"Count on it," Szpindel said.  "So far we've just been peeking from a distance, eh?  Bet all kinds of interesting stuff happens when we get in there and start poking with a stick."
"Maybe for you.  There's got to be a biological somewhere in the mix, with all those organics."
"Damn right.  And you'll be talking to 'em while I'm giving them their physicals."
"Maybe not.  I mean, Mom would never admit it in a million years but you had a point about language.  When you get right down to it, it's a workaround.  Like trying to describe dreams with smoke signals.  It's noble, it's maybe the most noble thing a body can do but you can't turn a sunset into a string of grunts without losing something.  It's limiting.  Maybe whatever's out here doesn't even use it."    
"Bet they do, though."
"Since when?  You're the one who's always pointing out how inefficient language is."
"Only when I'm trying to get under your skin.  Your pants—whole other thing."  He laughed at his own joke.  "Seriously, what are they gonna to use instead, telepathy?  I say you'll be up to your elbows in hieroglyphics before you know it.  And what's more, you'll decode 'em in record time."
"You're sweet, but I wonder.  Half the time I can't even decode Jukka."  Michelle fell silent a moment.  "He actually kind of throws me sometimes."
"You and seven billion others."
"Yeah.  I know it's silly, but when he's not around there's a part of me that can't stop wondering where he's hiding.  And when he's right there in front of me, I feel like I should be hiding."
"Not his fault he creeps us out."  
"I know.  But it's hardly a big morale booster.  What genius came up with the idea of putting a vampire in charge?"
"Where else you going to put them, eh?  You want to be the one giving orders to him?" 
"And it's not just the way he moves.  It's the way he talks.  It's just wrong."
"You know he—"
"I'm not talking about the present-tense thing, or all the glottals.  He—well, you know how he talks.  He's terse."
"It's efficient." 
"It's artificial, Isaac.  He's smarter than all of us put together, but sometimes he talks like he's got a fifty-word vocabulary." A soft snort.  "It's not like it'd kill him to use an adverb once in a while."
"Ah.  But you say that because you're a linguist, and you can't see why anyone wouldn't want to wallow in the sheer beauty of language." Szpindel harrumphed with mock pomposity.  "Now me, I'm a biologist, so it makes perfect sense."
"Really.  Then explain it to me, oh wise and powerful mutilator of frogs."
"Simple.  Bloodsucker's a transient, not a resident."
"What are—oh, those are killer whales, right?  Whistle dialects."
"I said forget the language.  Think about the lifestyle.  Residents are fish-eaters, eh?  They hang out in big groups, don't move around much, talk all the time."  I heard a whisper of motion, imagined Szpindel leaning in and laying a hand on Michelle's arm.  I imagined the sensors in his gloves telling him what she felt like.  "Transients, now—they eat mammals.  Seals, sea lions, smart prey.  Smart enough to take cover when they hear a fluke slap or a click train.  So transients are sneaky, eh?  Hunt in small groups, range all over the place, keep their mouths shut so nobody hears 'em coming."
"And Jukka's a transient."
"Man's instincts tell him to keep quiet around prey.  Every time he opens his mouth, every time he lets us see him, he's fighting his own brain stem.  Maybe we shouldn't be too harsh on the ol' guy just because he's not the world's best motivational speaker, eh?"
"He's fighting the urge to eat us every time we have a briefing?  That's reassuring."
Szpindel chuckled.  "It's probably not that bad.  I guess even killer whales let their guard down after making a kill.  Why sneak around on a full stomach, eh?"
"So he's not fighting his brain stem.  He just isn't hungry."
"Probably a little of both.  Brain stem never really goes away, you know.  But I'll tell you one thing." Some of the playfulness ebbed from Szpindel's voice.  "I've got no problem if Sarasti wants to run the occasional briefing from his quarters.  But the moment we stop seeing him altogether?  That's when you start watching your back."  

*

Looking back, I can finally admit it:  I envied Szpindel his way with the ladies.  Spliced and diced, a gangly mass of tics and jitters that could barely feel his own skin, somehow he managed to be—
Charming.  That's the word.  Charming.
As a social necessity it was all but obsolete, fading into irrelevance along with two-party nonvirtual sex pairing.  But even I'd tried one of those; and it would have been nice to have had Szpindel's self-deprecating skill set to call on.
Especially when everything with Chelsea started falling apart.
I had my own style, of course.  I tried to be charming in my own peculiar way.  Once, after one too many fights about honesty and emotional manipulation, I'd started to think maybe a touch of whimsy might smooth things over.  I had come to suspect that Chelsea just didn't understand sexual politics.  Sure she'd edited brains for a living, but maybe she'd just memorized all that circuitry without giving any thought to how it had arisen in the first place, to the ultimate rules of natural selection that had shaped it.  Maybe she honestly didn't know that we were evolutionary enemies, that all relationships were doomed to failure.  If I could slip that insight into her head— if I could charm my way past her defenses— maybe we'd be able to hold things together.
So I thought about it, and I came up with the perfect way to raise her awareness.  I wrote her a bedtime story, a disarming blend of humor and affection, and I called it

The Book of Oogenesis

In the beginning were the gametes.  And though there was sex, lo, there was no gender, and life was in balance.
And God said, "Let there be Sperm": and some seeds did shrivel in size and grow cheap to make, and they did flood the market.
And God said, "Let there be Eggs": and other seeds were afflicted by a plague of Sperm.  And yea, few of them bore fruit, for Sperm brought no food for the zygote, and only the largest Eggs could make up the shortfall.  And these grew yet larger in the fullness of time.
And God put the Eggs into a womb, and said, "Wait here:  for thy bulk has made thee unwieldy, and Sperm must seek thee out in thy chambers. Henceforth shalt thou be fertilized internally."  And it was so.
And God said to the gametes, "The fruit of thy fusion may abide in any place and take any shape.  It may breathe air or water or the sulphurous muck of hydrothermal vents.  But do not forget my one commandment unto you, which has not changed from the beginning of time:  spread thy genes."
And thus did Sperm and Egg go into the world.  And Sperm said,  "I am cheap and plentiful, and if sowed abundantly I will surely fulfill God's plan.  I shall forever seek out new mates and then abandon them when they are with child, for there are many wombs and little time."
But Egg said, "Lo, the burden of procreation weighs heavily upon me.  I must carry flesh that is but half mine, gestate and feed it even when it leaves my chamber" (for by now many of Egg's bodies were warm of blood, and furry besides).  "I can have but few children, and must devote myself to those, and protect them at every turn.  And I will make Sperm help me, for he got me into this.  And though he doth struggle at my side, I shall not let him stray, nor lie with my competitors."
And Sperm liked this not. 
And God smiled, for Its commandment had put Sperm and Egg at war with each other, even unto the day they made themselves obsolete.

I brought her flowers one dusky Tuesday evening when the light was perfect.  I pointed out the irony of that romantic old tradition— the severed genitalia of another species, offered as a precopulatory bribe—and then I recited my story just as we were about to fuck.
To this day, I still don't know what went wrong.

"The glass ceiling is in you.  The glass ceiling is conscience."
—Jacob Holtzbrinck, The Keys to the Planet 

There were stories, before we left Earth, of a fourth wave:  a fleet of deep-space dreadnoughts running silent in our wake, should the cannon fodder up front run into something nasty.  Or, if the aliens were friendly, an ambassadorial frigate full of politicians and CEOs ready to elbow their way to the front of the line.  Never mind that Earth had no deep-space dreadnoughts or ambassadorial spaceships; Theseus hadn't existed either, before Firefall.  Nobody had told us of any such such contingent, but you never show the Big Picture to your front line.  The less they know, the less they can betray. 
I still don't know if the fourth wave ever existed.  I never saw any evidence of one, for whatever that's worth.   We might have left them floundering back at Burns-Caulfield.  Or maybe they followed us all the way to Big Ben, crept just close enough to see what we were up against, and turned tail before things got ugly.
I wonder if that's what happened.  I wonder if they made it back home.
I look back now, and hope not.

*

A giant marshmallow kicked Theseus in the side.  Down swung like a pendulum.  Across the drum Szpindel yelped as if scalded;  in the galley, cracking a bulb of  hot coffee, I nearly was.
This is it, I thought.  We got too close.  They're hitting back.
"What the—"
A flicker on the party line as Bates linked from the bridge.  "Main drive just kicked in.  We're changing course."
"To what? Where?  Whose orders?"
"Mine," Sarasti said, appearing above us.
Nobody spoke.  Drifting into the drum through the stern hatchway:  the sound of something grinding.  I pinged Theseus' resource-allocation stack.  Fabrication was retooling itself for the mass production of doped ceramics.
Radiation shielding.  Solid stuff, bulky and primitive, not the controlled magnetic fields we usually relied on.
The Gang emerged sleepy-eyed from their tent, Sascha grumbling, "What the fuck?"
"Watch."  Sarasti took hold of ConSensus and shook it.
It was a blizzard, not a briefing:  gravity wells and orbital trajectories, shear-stress simulations in thunderheads of ammonium and hydrogen, stereoscopic planetscapes buried under filters ranging from gamma to radio.  I saw breakpoints and saddlepoints and unstable equilibria.  I saw fold catastrophes plotted in five dimensions.  My augments strained to rotate the information; my meaty half-brain struggled to understand the bottom line.
Something was hiding down there, in plain sight.
Ben's accretion belt still wasn't behaving.  Its delinquency wasn't obvious; Sarasti hadn't had to plot every pebble and mountain and planetesimal to find the pattern, but he'd come close.  And neither he nor the conjoined intelligence he shared with the Captain had been able to explain those trajectories as the mere aftermath of some past disturbance.  The dust wasn't just settling; some of it marched downhill to the beat of something that even now reached out from the cloud-tops and pulled debris from orbit.
Not all that debris seemed to hit.  Ben's equatorial regions flickered constantly with the light of meteorite impacts—much fainter than the bright wakes of the skimmers, and gone in the wink of an eye—but those frequency distributions didn't quite account for all the rocks that had fallen.  It was almost as though, every now and then, some piece of incoming detritus simply vanished into a parallel universe.
Or got caught by something in this one.  Something that circled Ben's equator every forty hours, almost low enough to graze the atmosphere.  Something that didn't show up in visible light, or infrared, or radar.  Something that might have remained pure hypothesis if a skimmer hadn't burned an incandescent trail across the atmosphere behind it when Theseus happened to be watching.
Sarasti threw that one dead center: a bright contrail streaking diagonally across Ben's perpetual nightscape, stuttering partway a degree or two to the left, stuttering back just before it passed from sight.  Freeze-frame showed a beam of light frozen solid, a segment snapped from its midsection and jiggled just a hair out of alignment.
A segment nine kilometers long.
"It's cloaked," Sascha said, impressed.
"Not very well."  Bates emerged from the forward hatch and sailed spinward.  "Pretty obvious refractory artefact."  She caught stairs halfway to the deck, used the torque of spin-against-spam to flip upright and plant her feet on the steps.  "Why didn't we catch that before?"
"No backlight," Szpindel suggested.
"It's not just the contrail.  Look at the clouds."  Sure enough, Ben's cloudy backdrop showed the same subtle dislocation.  Bates stepped onto the deck and headed for the conference table.  "We should've seen this earlier."

"The other probes see no such artefact," Sarasti said.  "This probe approaches from a wider angle.  Twenty-seven degrees."
"Wider angle to what?"  Sascha said.
"To the line," Bates murmured. "Between us and them."
It was all there on tactical:  Theseus fell inwards along an obvious arc, but the probes we'd dispatched hadn't dicked around with Hohmann transfers:  they'd burned straight down, their courses barely bending, all within a few degrees of the theoretical line connecting Ben to Theseus.
Except this one.  This one had come in wide, and seen the trickery.
"The further from our bearing, the more obvious the discontinuity," Sarasti intoned.  "Think it's clearly visible on any approach perpendicular to ours."
"So we're in a blind spot?  We see it if we change course?"
Bates shook her head. "The blind spot's moving, Sascha. It's—"
"Tracking us."  Sascha sucked breath between her teeth.  "Motherfucker."
Szpindel twitched.  "So what is it?  Our skimmer factory?"
The freeze-frame's pixels began to crawl.  Something emerged, granular and indistinct, from the turbulent swirls and curlicues of Ben's atmosphere.  There were curves, and spikes, and no smooth edges; I couldn't tell how much of the shape was real, and how much a fractal intrusion of underlying cloudscape. But the overall outline was that of a torus, or perhaps a collection of smaller jagged things piled together in a rough ring; and it was big.  Those nine klicks of displaced contrail had merely grazed the perimeter, cut across an arc of forty or fifty degrees.  This thing hiding in the shadow of ten Jupiters was almost thirty kilometers from side to side.
Sometime during Sarasti's executive summary we'd stopped accellerating.  Down was back where it belonged.  We weren't, though.  Our hesitant maybe-maybe-not approach was a thing of the past:  we vectored straight in now, and damn the torpedoes.
"Er, that's thirty klicks across," Sascha pointed out.  "And it's invisible.  Shouldn't we maybe be a little more cautious now?"
Szpindel shrugged.  "We could second-guess vampires, we wouldn't need vampires, eh?"  
A new facet bloomed on the feed.  Frequency histograms and harmonic spectra erupted from flatline into shifting mountainscapes, a chorus of visible light.
"Modulated laser," Bates reported.  
Szpindel looked up.  "From that?"
Bates nodded.  "Right after we blow its cover.  Interesting timing."
"Scary timing," Szpindel said.  "How'd it know?"
"We changed course.  We're heading right for it."
The lightscape played on, knocking at the window.
"Whatever it is," Bates said,  "it's talking to us."
"Well then," remarked a welcome voice.  "By all means let's say hello."
Susan James was back in the driver's seat.

*

I was the only pure spectator.
They all performed what duties they could.  Szpindel ran Sarasti's sketchy silhouette through a series of filters, perchance to squeeze a bit of biology from engineering.  Bates compared morphometrics between the cloaked artefact and the skimmers.  Sarasti watched us all from overhead and thought vampire thoughts deeper than anything we could aspire to.  But it was all just make-work.  The Gang of Four was on center stage, under the capable direction of Susan James.
She grabbed the nearest chair, sat, raised her hands as if cueing an orchestra.  Her fingers trembled in mid-air as she played virtual icons; her lips and jaw twitched with subvocal commands.  I tapped her feed and saw text accreting around the alien signal:

RORSCHACH TO VESSEL APPROACHING 116?AZ -23?DEC REL.  HELLO THESEUS.  RORSCHACH TO VESSEL APPROACHING 116?AZ -23?DEC REL. HELLO THESEUS.  RORSCHACH TO VESSEL APPROACHI

She'd decoded the damn thing.  Already.  She was even answering it:

Theseus to Rorschach.  Hello Rorschach.

HELLO THESEUS.  WELCOME TO THE NEIGHBORHOOD.

She'd had less than three minutes.  Or rather, they'd had less than three minutes:  four fully-conscious hub personalities and a few dozen unconscious semiotic modules, all working in parallel, all exquisitely carved from the same lump of gray matter.  I could almost see why someone would do such deliberate violence to their own minds, if it resulted in this kind of performance.
Up to now I had never fully convinced myself that even survival was sufficient cause.
Request permission to approach, the Gang sent.  Simple and straightforward:  just facts and data, thank you, with as little room as possible for ambiguity and misunderstanding.  Fancy sentiments like we come in peace could wait.  A handshake was not the time for cultural exchange.

YOU SHOULD STAY AWAY.  SERIOUSLY.  THIS PLACE IS DANGEROUS.

That got some attention.  Bates and Szpindel hesitated momentarily in their own headspaces and glanced into James'.

Request information on danger, the gang sent back.  Still keeping it concrete.

TOO CLOSE AND DANGEROUS TO YOU.  LOW ORBIT COMPLICATIONS.

Request information on low orbit complications.

LETHAL ENVIRONMENT.  ROCKS AND RADS.  YOU'RE WELCOME.  I CAN TAKE IT BUT WE'RE LIKE THAT.

We are aware of the rocks in low orbit.  We are equipped to deal with radiation.  Request information on other hazards.

I dug under the transcript to the channel it fed from.  Theseus had turned part of the incoming beam into a sound wave, according to the color code.  Vocal communication, then.  They spoke.  Waiting behind that icon were the raw sounds of an alien language.
Of course I couldn't resist.
"Anytime between friends, right?  Are you here for the celebration?"
English.  The voice was human, male.  Old.
"We are here to explore," replied the Gang, although their voice was pure Theseus.  "Request dialog with agents who sent objects into near-solar space."
"First contact.  Sounds like something to celebrate."
I double-checked the source.  No, this wasn't a translation; this was the actual unprocessed signal coming from—Rorschach, it had called itself.  Part of the signal, anyway; there were other elements, nonacoustic ones, encoded in the beam.
I browsed them while James said, "Request information about your celebration":  standard ship-to-ship handshaking protocols.
"You're interested."  The voice was stronger now, younger.
"Yes."
"You are?"
"Yes," the Gang repeated patiently.
"You are?"
The slightest hesitation.  "This is Theseus."
"I know that, baseline."  In Mandarin, now.    "Who are you?"
No obvious change in the harmonics.  Somehow, though, the voice seemed to have acquired an edge.
"This is Susan James.  I am a—"
"You wouldn't be happy here, Susan.  Fetishistic religious beliefs involved.  There are dangerous observances."
James chewed her lip.
"Request clarification.  Are we in danger from these observances?"
"You certainly could be."
"Request clarification.  Is it the observances that are dangerous, or the low-orbit environment?"
"The environment of the disturbances.  You should pay attention, Susan.  Inattention connotes indifference," Rorschach said.
"Or disrespect," it added after a moment.

*

We had four hours before Ben got in the way.  Four hours of uninterrupted nonstop communication made vastly easier than anyone had expected.  It spoke our language, after all.  Repeatedly it expressed polite concern for our welfare.  And yet, for all its facility with Human speech it told us very little.  For four hours it managed to avoid giving a straight answer on any subject beyond the extreme inadvisability of closer contact, and by the time it fell into eclipse we still didn't know why.
Sarasti dropped onto the deck halfway through the exchange, his feet never touching the stairs.  He reached out and grabbed a railing to steady himself on landing, and staggered only briefly.  If I'd tried that I'd have ended up bouncing along the deck like a pebble in a cement mixer.
He stood still as stone for the rest of the session, face motionless, eyes hidden behind his onyx visor.  When Rorschach's signal faded in midsentence he assembled us around the Commons table with a gesture.
"It talks," he said.
James nodded. "It doesn't say much, except for asking us to keep our distance.  So far the voice has manifested as adult male, although the apparent age changed a few times."
He'd heard all that.  "Structure?"
"The ship-to-ship protocols are perfect.  Its vocabulary is far greater than you could derive from standard nav chatter between a few ships, so they've been listening to all our insystem traffic—I'd say for several years at least.  On the other hand, the vocabulary doesn't have anywhere near the range you'd get by monitoring entertainment multimede, so they probably arrived after the Broadcast Age."
"How well do they use the vocabulary they have?"
"They're using phrase-structure grammar, long-distance dependencies.  FLN recursion, at least four levels deep and I see no reason why it won't go deeper with continued contact.  They're not parrots, Jukka.  They know the rules.  That name, for example—"
"Rorschach," Bates murmered, knuckles cracking as she squeezed her pet ball. "Interesting choice."
"I checked the registry.  There's an I-CAN freighter called Rorschach on the Martian Loop.  Whoever we're talking to must regard their own platform the way we'd regard a ship, and picked one of our names to fit."
Szpindel dropped into the chair beside me, fresh from a galley run.  A bulb of coffee glistened like gelatin in his hand.  "That name, out of all the ships in the innersys?  Seems way too symbolic for a random choice."
"I don't think it was random.  Unusual ship names provoke comment;  Rorschach's pilot goes ship-to-ship with some other vessel, the other vessel comes back with oh Grandma, what an unusual name you have, Rorschach replies with some off-the-cuff comment about nomenclatural origins and it all goes out in the EM.  Someone listening to all that chatter not only figures out the name and the thing it applies to, but can get some sense of meaning from the context.  Our alien friends probably eavesdropped on half the registry and deduced that Rorschach would be a better tag for something unfamiliar than, say, the SS Jaymie Matthews."
"Territorial and smart."  Szpindel grimaced, conjuring a mug from beneath his chair.  "Wonderful."
Bates shrugged.  "Territorial, maybe.  Not necessarily aggressive.  In fact, I wonder if they could hurt us even if they wanted to."
"I don't," Szpindel said. "Those skimmers—"
The major waved a dismissive hand. "Big ships turn slowly.  If they were setting up to snooker us we'd see it well in advance."  She looked around the table.  "Look, am I the only one who finds this odd?  An interstellar technology that redecorates superJovians and lines up meteoroids like elephants on parade, and they were hiding?  From us?"
"Unless there's someone else out here," James suggested uneasily.
Bates shook her head.  "The cloak was directional.  It was aimed at us and no one else."
"And even we saw through it,"  Szpindel added.  
"Exactly.  So they go to Plan B, which so far amounts to nothing but bluster and vague warnings.  I'm just saying, they're not acting like giants.  Rorschach's behavior feels—improvised.  I don't think they expected us."
"'Course not.  Burns-Caulfield was—"
"I don't think they expected us yet."
"Um," Szpindel said, digesting it.
The major ran one hand over her naked scalp.  "Why would they expect us to just give up after we learned we'd been sniped?  Of course we'd look elsewhere.  Burns-Caulfield could only have been intended as a delaying action; if I was them, I'd plan on us getting out here eventually.  But I think they miscalculated somehow.  We got out here sooner than they expected and caught them with their pants down."
Szpindel split the bulb and emptied it into his mug.  "Pretty large miscalculation for something so smart, eh?"  A hologram bloomed on contact with the steaming liquid, glowing in soft commemoration of the Gaza Glasslands.  The scent of plasticised coffee flooded the Commons.  "Especially after they'd surveilled us down to the square meter," he added.
"And what did they see?  I-CANNs.  Solar sails. Ships that  take years to reach the Kuiper, and don't have the reserves to go anywhere else afterwards.  Telematter didn't exist beyond Boeing's simulators and a half-dozen protypes back then.  Easy to miss.  They must've figured one decoy would buy them all the time they needed."
"To do what?" James wondered.
"Whatever it is," Bates said, "We're ringside."
Szpindel raised his mug with an infirm hand and sipped.  The coffee trembled in its prison, the surface wobbling and blobbing in the drum's half-hearted gravity.  James pursed her lips in faint disapproval.  Open-topped containers for liquids were technically verboten in variable-gravity environments, even for people without Szpindel's dexterity issues.
"So they're bluffing," Szpindel said at last.
Bates nodded.  "That's my guess.  Rorschach's still under construction.  We could be dealing with an automated system of some kind."
"So we can ignore the keep-off-the-grass signs, eh?  Walk right in."
"We can afford to bide our time.  We can afford to not push it."
"Ah.  So even though we could maybe handle it now, you want to wait until it graduates from covert to invulnerable."  Szpindel shuddered, set down his coffee.  "Where'd you get your military training again?  Sporting Chance Academy?"
Bates ignored the jibe.  "The fact that Rorschach's still growing may be the best reason to leave it alone for a while.  We don't have any idea what the—mature, I guess—what the mature form of this artefact might be.  Sure, it hid.  Lots of animals take cover from predators without being predators, especially young ones.  Sure, it's—evasive.  Doesn't give us the answers we want.  But maybe it doesn't know them, did you consider that?  How much luck would you have interrogating a Human embryo?   Adult could be a whole different animal."
"Adult could put our asses through a meatgrinder."
"So could the embryo for all we know."  Bates rolled her eyes.  "Jesus, Isaac, you're the biologist.  I shouldn't have to tell you how many shy reclusive critters pack a punch when they're cornered.  Porcupine doesn't want any trouble, but he'll still give you a faceful of quills if you ignore the warning."
Szpindel said nothing.  He slid his coffee sideways along the concave tabletop, to the very limit of his reach.  The liquid sat there in its mug, a dark circle perfectly parallel to the rim but canted slightly towards us.  I even thought I could make out the merest convexity in the surface itself.
Szpindel smiled faintly at the effect.
James cleared her throat.  "Not to downplay your concerns, Isaac, but we've hardly exhausted the diplomatic route.  And at least it's willing to talk, even if it's not as forthcoming as we'd like."
"Sure it talks," Szpindel said, eyes still on the leaning mug.  "Not like us." 
"Well, no.  There's some—"
"It's not just slippery, it's downright dyslexic sometimes, you noticed?  And it mixes up its pronouns."
"Given that it picked up the language entirely via passive eavesdropping, it's remarkably fluent.  In fact, from what I can tell they're more efficient at processing speech than we are."
"Gotta be efficient at a language if you're going to be so evasive in it, eh?" 
"If they were human I might agree with you," James replied.  "But what appears to us as evasion or deceit could just as easily be explained by a reliance on smaller conceptual units."
"Conceptual units?"  Bates, I was beginning to realize, never pulled up a subtitle if she could help it.
James nodded.  "Like processing a line of text word by word, instead of looking at complete phrases.  The smaller the units, the faster they can be reconfigured; it gives you very fast semantic reflexes.  The down side is that it's difficult to maintain the same level of logical consistency, since the patterns within the larger structure are more likely to get shuffled."
"Whoa."  Szpindel straightened, all thoughts of liquids and centipetal force forgotten.
"All I'm saying is, we aren't necessarily dealing with deliberate deception here.  An entity who parses information at one scale might not be aware of inconsistencies on another; it might not even have conscious access to that level."
"That's not all you're saying."
"Isaac, you can't apply Human norms to a—"
"I wondered what you were up to."  Szpindel dove into the transcripts.  A moment later he dredged up an excerpt:

Request information on environments you consider lethal.  Request information on your response to the prospect of imminent exposure to lethal environments.

GLAD TO COMPLY.  BUT YOUR LETHAL IS DIFFERENT FROM US. THERE ARE MANY MIGRATING CIRCUMSTANCES.

"You were testing it!" Szpindel crowed.  He smacked his lips; his jaw ticced.   You were looking for an emotional response!"
"It was just a thought.  It didn't prove anything."
"Was there a difference?  In the response time?"
James hesitated, then shook her head.  "But it was a stupid idea.  There are so many variables, we have no idea how they—I mean, they're alien..."
"The pathology's classic."
"What pathology?" I asked.
"It doesn't mean anything except that they're different from the Human baseline," James insisted.  "Which is not something anyone here can look down their nose about."
I tried again:  "What pathology?"
James shook her head.  Szpindel filled me in:  "There's a syndrome you might have heard about, eh?  Fast talkers, no conscience, tend to malapropism and self-contradiction.  No emotional affect."
"We're not talking about human beings here," James said again, softly.
"But if we were," Szpindel added, "we might call Rorschach a clinical sociopath."
Sarasti had said nothing during this entire exchange.  Now, with the word hanging out in the open, I noticed that nobody else would look at him.

*

We all knew that Jukka Sarasti was a sociopath, of course.  Most of us just didn't mention it in polite company.
Szpindel was never that polite.  Or maybe it was just that he seemed to almost understand Sarasti; he could look behind the monster and regard the organism, no less a product of natural selection for all the human flesh it had devoured in eons past.  That perspective calmed him, somehow.  He could watch Sarasti watching him, and not flinch.
"I feel sorry for the poor son of a bitch," he said once, back in training.
Some would have thought that absurd.  This man, so massively interfaced with machinery that his own motor skills had degraded for want of proper care and feeding; this man who heard x-rays and saw in shades of ultrasound, so corrupted by retrofits he could no longer even feel his own fingertips without assistance—this man could pity anyone else, let alone an infra-eyed predator built to murder without the slightest twitch of remorse?
"Empathy for sociopaths isn't common," I remarked. 
"Maybe it should be.  We, at least—" he waved an arm; some remote-linked sensor cluster across the simulator whirred and torqued reflexively— "chose the add-ons.  Vampires had to be sociopaths.  They're too much like their own prey—a lot of taxonomists don't even consider them a subspecies, you know that?  Never diverged far enough for complete reproductive isolation.  So maybe they're more syndrome than race.  Just a bunch of obligate cannibals with a consistent set of deformities."
"And how does that make—"
"If the only thing you can eat is your own kind, empathy is gonna be the first thing that goes.  Psychopathy's no disorder in those shoes, eh?  Just a survival strategy.  But they still make our skin crawl, so we—chain 'em up."
"You think we should've repaired the Crucifix glitch?"  Everyone knew why we hadn't.  Only a fool would resurrect a monster without safeguards in place.  Vampires came with theirs built in:  without his antiEuclideans Sarasti would go grand mal the first time he caught close sight of a four-panel window frame.
But Szpindel was shaking his head.  "We couldn't have fixed it.  Or we could have," he amended, "but the glitch is in the visual cortex, eh?  Linked to their omnisavantism.  You fix it, you disable their pattern-matching skills, and then what's the point in even bringing them back?"
"I didn't know that."
"Well, that's the official story."  He fell silent a moment, cracked a crooked grin.  "Then again, we didn't have any trouble fixing the protocadherin pathways when it suited us."
I subtitled.  Context-sensitive, ConSensus served up protocadherin ?-Y:  the magical hominid brain protein that vampires had never been able to synthesize.  The reason they hadn't just switched to zebras or warthogs once denied Human prey, why our discovery of the terrible secret of the Right Angle had spelled their doom.  
"Anyway, I just think he's—cut off."  A nervous tic tugged at the corner of Szpindel's mouth.  "Lone wolf, nothing but sheep for company.  Wouldn't you feel lonely?"
"They don't like company," I reminded him.  You didn't put vampires of the same sex together, not unless you were taking bets on a bloodbath.  They were solitary hunters and very territorial.  With a minimum viable pred-prey ratio of one to ten—and human prey spread so sparsely across the Pleistocene landscape—the biggest threat to their survival had been competition from their own kind.  Natural selection had never taught them to play nicely together.
That didn't cut any ice with Szpindel, though.  "Doesn't mean he can't be lonely," he insisted.
"Just means he can't fix it."
"They know the music but not the words." 
— Hare, Without Conscience

We did it with mirrors, great round parabolic things, each impossibly thin and three times as high as a man.  Theseus rolled them up and bolted them to firecrackers stuffed with precious antimatter from our dwindling stockpiles.  With twelve hours to spare she flung them like confetti along precise ballistic trajectories, and when they were safely distant she set them alight.  They pinwheeled off every which way, gamma sleeting in their wake until they burned dry.  Then they coasted, unfurling mercurial insect wings across the void.
In the greater distance, four hundred thousand alien machines looped and burned and took no obvious notice.
Rorschach fell around Ben barely fifteen hundred kilometers from atmosphere, a fast endless circle that took just under forty hours to complete.  By the time it didn't return to our sight, the mirrors were all outside the zone of total blindness.  A closeup of Ben's equatorial edge floated in ConSensus.  Mirror icons sparkled around it like an exploding schematic, like the disconnected facets of some great expanding compound eye.  None had brakes.  Whatever high ground the mirrors held, they wouldn't hold it for long.
"There," Bates said.
A mirage wavered stage left, a tiny spot of swirling chaos perhaps half the size of a fingernail held at arms-length.  It told us nothing, it was pure heat-shimmer—but light bounced towards us from dozens of distant relayers, and while each saw scarcely more than our last probe had— a  patch of dark clouds set slightly awry by some invisible prism— each of those views refracted differently.  The Captain sieved flashes from the heavens and stitched them into a composite view.
Details emerged.
First a faint sliver of shadow, a tiny dimple all but lost in the seething equatorial cloud bands.  It had just barely rotated into view around the edge of the disk— a rock in the stream perhaps, an invisible finger stuck in the clouds, turbulence and shear stress shredding the boundary layers to either side.
Szpindel squinted. "Plage effect."  Subtitles said he was talking about a kind of sunspot, a knot in Ben's magnetic field.
"Higher," James said.
Something floated above that dimple in the clouds, the way a ground-effect ocean-liner floats above the depression it pushes into the water's surface.  I zoomed:  next to an Oasa subdwarf with ten times the mass of Jupiter, Rorschach was tiny.  
Next to Theseus, it was a colossus.
Not just a torus but a tangle, a city-sized chaos of spun glass, loops and bridges and attenuate spires.  The surface texture was pure artifice, of course; ConSensus merely giftwrapped the enigma in refracted background.  Still. It some dark, haunting way, it was almost beautiful.  A nest of obsidian snakes and smoky crystal spines.  
"It's talking again," James reported.
"Talk back," Sarasti said, and abandoned us.

*

So she did:  and while the Gang spoke with the artefact, the others spied upon it.  Their vision failed over time—mirrors fell away along their respective vectors, lines-of-sight degraded with each passing second—but ConSensus filled with things learned in the meantime.  Rorschach massed  1.8.1010 kg within a total volume of 2.3.108 cubic meters.  Its magnetic field, judging by radio squeals and its Plage Effect, was thousands of times stronger than the sun's.  Astonishingly, parts of the composite image were clear enough to discern fine spiral grooves twined around the structure.  ("Fibonacci sequence," Szpindel reported, one jiggling eye fixing me for a moment.  "At least they're not completely alien.")  Spheroid protuberances disfigured the tips of at least three of Rorschach's innumerable spines; the grooves were more widely spaced in those areas, like skin grown tight and swollen with infection.  Just before one vital mirror sailed out of range it glimpsed another spine, split a third of the way along its length.  Torn material floated flaccid and unmoving in vacuum.
"Please," Bates said softly.  "Tell me that's not what it looks like."
Szpindel grinned.  "Sporangium?  Seed pod?  Why not?"
Rorschach may have been reproducing but beyond a doubt it was growing, fed by a steady trickle of infalling debris from Ben's accretion belt.  We were close enough now to get a clear view of that procession:  rocks and mountains and pebbles fell like sediment swirling around a drain.  Particles that collided with the artefact simply stuck;  Rorschach engulfed prey like some vast metastatic amoeba.  The acquired mass was apparently processed internally and shunted to apical growth zones; judging by infinitesimal changes in the artefact's allometry, it grew from the tips of its branches.
The procession never stopped.  Rorschach was insatiable.
It was a strange attractor in the interstellar gulf; the paths along which the rocks fell was precisely and utterly chaotic.  It was as  though some Keplerian Black Belt had set up the whole system like an astronomical wind-up toy, kicked everything into motion, and let inertia do the rest.
"Didn't think that was possible," Bates said.
Szpindel shrugged.  "Hey, chaotic trajectories are just as deterministic as any other kind."
"That doesn't mean you can even predict them, let along set them up like that."  Luminous intel reflected off the major's bald head.  "You'd have to know the starting conditions of a million different variables to ten decimal places.  Literally."
"Yup."
"Vampires can't even do that.  Quanticle computers can't do that."
Szpindel shrugged like a marionette.
All the while the Gang had been slipping in and out of character, dancing with some unseen partner that—despite their best efforts— told us little beyond endless permutations of You really wouldn't like it here.  Any interrogative it answered with another— yet somehow it always left the sense of questions answered. 
"Did you send the Fireflies?" Sascha asked.
"We send many things many places," Rorschach replied.  "What do their specs show?"
"We do not know their specifications. The Fireflies burned up over Earth."
"Then shouldn't you be looking there?  When our kids fly, they're on their own."
Sascha muted the channel.  "You know who we're talking to?  Jesus of fucking Nazareth, that's who."
Szpindel looked at Bates.  Bates shrugged, palms up.
"You didn't get it?"  Sascha shook her head.  "That last exchange was the informational  equivalent of Should we render taxes unto Caesar.  Beat for beat."
"Thanks for casting us as the Pharisees," Szpindel grumbled.
"Hey, if the Jew fits..."
Szpindel rolled his eyes.
That was when I first noticed it:  a tiny imperfection on Sascha's topology, a flyspeck of doubt marring one of her facets.  "We're not getting anywhere," she said.  "Let's try a side door."  She winked out:  Michelle reopened the outgoing line.  "Theseus to Rorschach.  Open to requests for information."
"Cultural exchange," Rorschach said.  "That works for me." 
Bates's brow furrowed.  "Is that wise?"
"If it's not inclined to give information, maybe it would rather get some.  And we could learn a great deal from the kind of questions it asks."
"But—"
"Tell us about home," Rorschach said.
Sascha resurfaced just long enough to say "Relax, Major.  Nobody said we had to give it the right answers."
The stain on the Gang's topology had flickered when Michelle took over, but it hadn't disappeared.  It grew slightly as Michelle described some hypothetical home town in careful terms that mentioned no object smaller than a meter across.  (ConSensus confirmed my guess:  the hypothetical limit of Firefly eyesight.)  When Cruncher took a rare turn at the helm— 
"We don't all of us have parents or cousins.  Some never did.  Some come from vats."
"I see.  That's sad.  Vats sounds so dehumanising."
—the stain darkened and spread across his surface like an oil slick.  
"Takes too much on faith," Susan said a few moments later. 
By the time Sascha had cycled back into Michelle it was more than doubt, stronger than suspicion; it had become an insight, a dark little meme infecting each of that body's minds in turn.  The Gang was on the trail of something.  They still weren't sure what.
I was.
"Tell me more about your cousins," Rorschach sent.
"Our cousins lie about the family tree," Sascha replied, "with nieces and nephews and Neandertals.  We do not like annoying cousins."
"We'd like to know about this tree."
Sascha muted the channel and gave us a look that said Could it be any more obvious?  "It couldn't have parsed that.  There were three linguistic ambiguities in there.  It just ignored them."
"Well, it asked for clarification," Bates pointed out. 
"It asked a follow-up question.  Different thing entirely."
Bates was still out of the loop.  Szpindel was starting to get it, though.. .
Subtle motion drew my eye.  Sarasti was back, floating above the bright topography on the table.  The light show squirmed across his visor as he moved his head.  I could feel his eyes behind it.
And something else, behind him.
I couldn't tell what it was.  I could point to nothing but a vague sense of something out of place, somewhere in the background.  Something over on the far side of the drum wasn't quite right.  No, that wasn't it; something nearer, something amiss somewhere along the drum's axis.  But there was nothing there, nothing I could see—just the naked pipes and conduits of the spinal bundle, threading through empty space, and—
And suddenly, whatever had been wrong was right again.  That was what finally locked my focus:  the evaporation of some anomaly, a reversion to normalcy that caught my eye like a flicker of motion.  I could see the exact spot along the bundle where the change had occured.  There was nothing out of place there now—but there had been.  It was in my head, barely subliminal, an itch so close to the surface that I knew I could bring it back if I just concentrated.
Sascha was talking to some alien artefact at the end of a laser beam.  She was going on about familial relationships, both evolutionary and domestic: Neandertal and Cro Magnon and mother's cousins twice removed.  She'd been doing it for hours now and she had hours yet to go but right now her chatter was distracting me.  I tried to block her out and concentrate on the half-perceived image teasing my memory.  I'd seen something there, just a moment ago.  One of the conduits had had—yes, too many joints on one of the pipes.  Something that should have been straight and smooth but was somehow articulated instead.  But not one of the pipes, I remembered: an extra pipe, an extra something anyway, something—
Boney.
That was crazy.  There was nothing there.  We were half a light year from home talking to unseen aliens about family reunions, and my eyes were playing tricks on me.
Have to talk to Szpindel about that, if it happened again.

*

A lull in the background chatter brought me back.  Sascha had stopped talking.  Darkened facets hung around her like a thundercloud.  I pulled back the last thing she had sent:  "We usually find our nephews with telescopes.  They are hard as Hobblinites."
More calculated ambiguity.  And Hobblinites wasn't even a word.  
 Imminent decisions reflected in her eyes.  Sascha was poised at the edge of a precipice, gauging the depth of dark waters below.
"You haven't mentioned your father at all," Rorschach remarked.
"That's true, Rorschach," Sascha admitted softly, taking a breath—  
And stepping forward.
"So why don't you just suck my big fat hairy dick?"
The drum fell instantly silent.  Bates and Szpindel stared, open-mouthed.  Sascha killed the channel and turned to face us, grinning so widely I thought the top of her head would fall off.
"Sascha," Bates breathed.  "Are you crazy?"
"So what if I am?  Doesn't matter to that thing.  It doesn't have a clue what I'm saying."
"What?"
"It doesn't even have a clue what it's saying back," she added.
"Wait a minute.  You said—Susan said they weren't parrots.  They knew the rules."
And there Susan was, melting to the fore:  "I did, and they do.  But pattern-matching doesn't equal comprehension."
Bates shook her head.  "You're saying whatever we're talking to—it's not even intelligent?"
"Oh, it could be intelligent, certainly.  But we're not talking to it in any meaningful sense."
"So what is it?  Voicemail?"
"Actually," Szpindel said slowly, "I think they call it a Chinese Room..."
About bloody time, I thought.

*

I knew all about Chinese Rooms.  I was one.  I didn't even keep it a secret, I told anyone who was interested enough to ask.
In hindsight, sometimes that was a mistake.
"How can you possibly tell the rest of us what your bleeding edge is up to if you don't understand it yourself?"  Chelsea demanded back when things were good between us.  Before she got to know me.
I shrugged. "It's not my job to understand them.  If I could, they wouldn't be very bleeding-edge in the first place.  I'm just a, you know, a conduit."
"Yeah, but how can you translate something if you don't understand it?"
A common cry, outside the field.  People simply can't accept that patterns carry their own intelligence, quite apart from the semantic content that clings to their surfaces; if you manipulate the topology correctly, that content just—comes along for the ride.
"You ever hear of the Chinese Room?" I asked.
She shook her head.  "Only vaguely.  Really old, right?"
"Hundred years at least.  It's a fallacy really, it's an argument that supposedly puts the lie to Turing tests.  You stick some guy in a closed room.  Sheets with strange squiggles come in through a slot in the wall.  He's got access to this huge database of squiggles just like it, and a bunch of rules to tell him how to put those squiggles together."
"Grammar," Chelsea said.  "Syntax."
I nodded.  "The point is, though, he doesn't have any idea what the squiggles are, or what information they might contain.  He only knows that when he encounters squiggle delta, say, he's supposed to extract the fifth and sixth squiggles from file theta and put them together with another squiggle from gamma.  So he builds this response string, puts it on the sheet, slides it back out the slot and takes a nap until the next iteration.  Repeat until the remains of the horse are well and thoroughly beaten."
"So he's carrying on a conversation," Chelsea said.  "In Chinese, I assume, or they would have called it the Spanish Inquisition."
"Exactly.  Point being you can use basic pattern-matching algorithms to participate in a conversation without having any idea what you're saying.  Depending on how good your rules are, you can pass a Turing test.  You can be a wit and raconteur in a language you don't even speak."
"That's synthesis?"
"Only the part that involves downscaling semiotic protocols.  And only in principle.  And I'm actually getting my input in Cantonese and replying in German, because I'm more of a conduit than a conversant.  But you get the idea."
"How do you keep all the rules and protocols straight?  There must be millions of them."
"It's like anything else.  Once you learn the rules, you do it unconsciously.  Like riding a bike, or pinging the noosphere.  You don't actively think about the protocols at all, you just—imagine how your targets behave."
"Mmm."  A subtle half-smile played at the corner of her mouth.  "But—the argument's not really a fallacy then, is it?  It's spot-on:  you really don't understand Cantonese or German."
"The system understands.  The whole Room, with all its parts.  The guy who does the scribbling is just one component.  You wouldn't expect a single neuron in your head to understand English, would you?"
"Sometimes one's all I can spare."  Chelsea shook her head.  She wasn't going to let it go.  I could see her sorting questions in order of priority; I could see them getting increasingly—personal…
"To get back to the matter at hand," I said, preempting them all, "you were going to show me how to do that thing with the fingers…"
A wicked grin wiped the questions right off her face.  "Oooh, that's right…"
It's risky, getting involved.  Too many confounds.  Every tool in the shed goes dull and rusty the moment you get entangled with the system you're observing.
Still serviceable in a pinch, though.

*

"It hides now," Sarasti said.  "It's vulnerable now.
"Now we go in."
It wasn't news so much as review:  we'd been straight-lining towards Ben for days now.  But perhaps the Chinese Room Hypothesis had strengthened his resolve.  At any rate, with Rorschach in eclipse once more, we prepared to take intrusiveness to the next level.
Theseus was perpetually gravid; a generic probe incubated in her fabrication plant, its development arrested just short of birth in anticipation of unforeseen mission requirements.  Sometime between briefings the Captain had brought it to parturition, customized for close contact and ground work.  It burned down the well at high gee a good ten hours before Rorschach's next scheduled appearance, inserted itself into the rock stream, and went to sleep.  If our calculations were in order, it would not be smashed by some errant piece of debris before it woke up again.  If all went well, an intelligence that had precisely orchestrated a cast of millions would not notice one extra dancer on the floor.  If we were just plain lucky, the myriad high-divers that happened to be line-of-sight at the time were not programmed as tattletales.
Acceptable risks. If we hadn't been up for them, we might as well have stayed home.
And so we waited:  four optimized hybrids somewhere past the threshold of mere humanity, one extinct predator who'd opted to command us instead of eating us alive.  We waited for Rorschach to come back around the bend.  The probe fell smoothly around the well, an ambassador to the unwilling—or, if the Gang was right, maybe just a back-door artist set to B&E an empty condo.  Szpindel had named it Jack-in-the-box, after some antique child's toy that didn't even rate a listing in ConSensus;  we fell in its wake, nearly ballistic now, momentum and inertia carefully precalculated to thread us through the chaotic minefield of Ben's accretion belt.
Kepler couldn't do it all, though;  Theseus grumbled briefly now and then, the intermittent firing of her attitude jets rumbling softly up the spine as the  Captain tweaked our descent into the Maelstrom.
No plan ever survives contact with the enemy I remembered, but I didn't know from where.
"Got it," Bates said.  A speck appeared at Ben's edge; the display zoomed instantly to closeup.  "Proximity boot."
Rorschach remained invisible to Theseus, close as we were, close as we were coming.  But parallax stripped at least some of the scales from the probe's eyes; it woke to spikes and spirals of smoky glass flickering in and out of view, Ben's flat endless horizon semivisible through the intervening translucence.  The view trembled; waveforms rippled across ConSensus.
"Quite the magnetic field," Szpindel remarked.
"Braking," Bates reported.  Jack turned smoothly retrograde and fired its torch.  On Tactical, delta-vee swung to red.
Sascha was driving the Gang's body this shift.  "Incoming signal," she reported.  "Same format."
Sarasti clicked.  "Pipe it."
"Rorschach to Theseus.  Hello again, Theseus."  The voice was female this time, and middle-aged.
Sascha grinned "See?  She's not offended at all.  Big hairy dick notwithstanding."
"Don't answer," Sarasti said.
"Burn complete," Bates reported.
Coasting now, Jack—sneezed.  Silver chaff shot into the void towards the target:  millions of compass needles, brilliantly reflective, fast enough to make Theseus seem slow.   They were gone in an instant.  The probe watched them flee, swept laser eyes across every degree of arc, scanned its sky twice a second and took careful note of each and every reflective flash.  Only at first did those needles shoot along anything approaching a straight line: then they swept abruptly into Lorentz spirals, twisted into sudden arcs and corkscrews, shot away along new and intricate trajectories bordering on the relativistic.  The contours of Rorschach's magnetic field resolved in ConSensus, at first glance like the nested layers of a glass onion.
"Sproinnnng," Szpindel said.
At second glance the onion grew wormy.  Invaginations appeared, long snaking tunnels of energy proliferating fractally at every scale.
"Rorschach to Theseus.  Hello, Theseus.  You there?"
A holographic inset beside the main display plotted the points of a triangle in flux: Theseus at the apex, Rorschach and Jack defining the narrow base.
"Rorschach to Theseus.  I seeee you...."
"She's got a more casual affect than he ever did."  Sascha glanced up at Sarasti, and did not add You sure about this?  She was starting to wonder herself, though.  Starting to dwell on the potential consequences of being wrong, now that we were committed.  As far as sober second thought was concerned it was too little too late; but for Sascha, that was progress.
Besides, it had been Sarasti's decision.
Great hoops were resolving in Rorschach's magnetosphere.  Invisible to human eyes, their outlines were vanishingly faint even on Tactical;  the chaff had scattered so thinly across the sky that even the Captain was resorting to guesswork.  The new macrostructures hovered in the magnetosphere like the nested gimbals of some great phantom gyroscope.  
"I see you haven't changed your vector," Rorschach remarked.  "We really wouldn't advise continuing your approach.  Seriously.  For your own safety."
Szpindel shook his head.  "Hey, Mandy.  Rorschach talking to Jack at all?"
"If it is, I'm not seeing it.  No incident light, no directed EM of any kind."  She smiled grimly.  "Seems to have snuck in under the radar.  And don't call me Mandy."
Theseus groaned, twisting.  I staggered in the low pseudograv, reached out to steady myself.  "Course correction," Bates reported.  "Unplotted rock."
"Rorschach to Theseus.  Please respond.  Your current heading is unacceptable, repeat, your current heading is unacceptable.  Strongly advise you change course."
By now the probe coasted just a few kilometers off Rorschach's leading edge.  That close it served up way more than magnetic fields:  it presented Rorschach itself in bright, tactical color codes.  Invisible curves and spikes iridesced in ConSensus across any number of on-demand pigment schemes:  gravity, reflectivity, blackbody emissions.  Massive electrical bolts erupting from the tips of thorns rendered in lemon pastels.  User-friendly graphics had turned Rorschach into a cartoon.
"Rorschach to Theseus.  Please respond."
Theseus growled to stern, fishtailing.  On tactical, another just-plotted piece of debris swept by a discreet six thousand meters to port.
"Rorschach to Theseus.  If you are unable to respond, please—holy shit!"
The cartoon flickered and died.
I'd seen what had happened in that last instant, though:  Jack passing near one of those great phantom hoops; a tongue of energy flicking out, quick as a frog's; a dead feed.
"I see what you're up to now, you cocksuckers.  Do you think we're fucking blind down here?"
Sascha clenched her teeth. "We—"
"No," Sarasti said.
"But it fi—"
Sarasti hissed, from somewhere in the back of his throat.  I had never heard a mammal make a noise quite like that before.  Sascha fell immediately silent.
Bates negotiated with her controls.  "I've still got—just a sec—" 
"You pull that thing back right fucking now, you hear us?  Right fucking now."
"Got it." Bates gritted as the feed came back up.  "Just had to reacquire the laser."  The probe had been kicked wildly off-course—as if someone fording a river had been caught in sudden undertow and thrown over a waterfall—but it was still talking, and still mobile.
Barely.   Bates struggled to stay the course.  Jack staggered and wobbled uncontrollably though the tightly-wound folds of Rorschach's magnetosphere.  The artefact loomed huge in its eye.  The feed strobed. 
"Maintain approach," Sarasti said calmly.
"Love to," Bates gritted.  "Trying."
Theseus skidded again, corkscrewing.  I could have sworn I heard the bearings in the drum grind for a moment.  Another rock sailed past on Tactical.
"I thought you'd plotted those things," Szpindel grumbled.
"You want to start a war, Theseus?  Is that what you're trying to do?  You think you're up for it?"
"It doesn't attack," Sarasti said.
"Maybe it does."  Bates kept her voice low; I could see the effort it took.  "If Rorschach can control the trajectories of these—"
"Normal distribution.  Insignificant corrections."  He must have meant statistically: the torque and grind of the ship's hull felt pretty significant to the others. 
"Oh, right," Rorschach said suddenly.  "We get it now.  You don't think there's anyone here, do you?  You've got some high-priced consultant telling you there's nothing to worry about."
Jack was deep in the forest.  We'd lost most of the tactical overlays to reduced baud.  In dim visible light Rorschach's great ridged spines, each the size of a skyscraper, hashed a nightmare view on all sides.  The feed stuttered as Bates struggled to keep the beam aligned.  ConSensus painted walls and airspace with arcane telemetry.  I had no idea what any of it meant. 
"You think we're nothing but a Chinese Room," Rorschach sneered.
Jack stumbled towards collision, grasping for something to hang on to.
"Your mistake, Theseus."
It hit something.  It stuck.
And suddenly Rorschach snapped into view—no refractory composites, no profiles or simulations in false color.  There it was at last, naked even to Human eyes.
Imagine a crown of thorns, twisted, dark and unreflective, grown too thickly tangled to ever rest on any human head.  Put it in orbit around a failed star whose own reflected half-light does little more than throw its satellites into silhouette.  Occasional bloody highlights glinted like dim embers from its twists and crannies; they only emphasized the darkness everywhere else.
Imagine an artefact that embodies the very notion of torture, something so wrenched and disfigured that even across uncounted lightyears and unimaginable differences in biology and outlook, you can't help but feel that somehow, the structure itself is in pain.
Now make it the size of a city.
It flickered as we watched.  Lightning arced from recurved spines a thousand meters long.  ConSensus showed us a strobe-lit hellscape, huge and dark and twisted.  The composites had lied.  It was not the least bit beautiful.
"Now it's too late," something said from deep inside.  "Now every last one of you is dead.  And Susan?  You there, Susan?
"We're taking you first."
"Life's too short for chess." 
— Byron 

They never sealed the hatch behind them.  It was too easy to get lost up there in the dome, naked infinite space stretching a hundred eighty degrees on every axis.  They needed all that emptiness but they needed an anchor in its midst:  soft stray light from astern, a gentle draft from the drum, the sounds of people and machinery close by.  They needed to have it both ways.
I lay in wait.  Reading a dozen blatant cues in their behavior, I was already squirreled away in the forward airlock when they passed.  I gave them a few minutes and crept forward to the darkened bridge.
"Of course they called her by name," Szpindel was saying.  "That was the only name they had.  She told them, remember?"
"Yes."  Michelle didn't seem reassured.
"Hey, it was you guys said we were talking to a Chinese Room.  You saying you were wrong?"
"We—no.  Of course not."
"Then it wasn't really threatening Suze at all, was it?  It wasn't threatening any of us.  It had no idea what it was saying."
"It's rule-based, Isaac.  It was following some kind of  flowchart it drew up by observing Human languages in action.  And somehow those rules told it to respond with threats of violence."
"But if it doesn't even know what it was saying—"
"It doesn't.  It can't.   We parsed the phrasing nineteen different ways, tried out conceptual units of every different length..." A long, deep breath.  "But it attacked the probe, Isaac."
"Jack just got too close to one of those electrode thingies is all.  It just arced."
"So you don't think Rorschach is hostile?"
Long silence—long enough to make me wonder if I'd been detected.
"Hostile," Szpindel said at last.  "Friendly.  We learned those words for life on Earth, eh?  I don't know if they even apply out here."  His lips smacked faintly.  "But I think it might be something like hostile."
Michelle sighed.  "Isaac, there's no reason for—I mean, it just doesn't make sense that it would be.  We can't have anything it wants."
"It says it wants to be left alone," Szpindel said.  "Even if it doesn't mean it."
They floated quietly for a while, up there past the bulkhead.
"At least the shielding held," Szpindel said finally.  "That's something."  He wasn't just talking about Jack; our own carapace was coated with the same stuff now.  It had depleted our substrate stockpiles by two thirds, but no one wanted to rely on the ship's usual magnetics in the face of anything that could play so easily with the electromagnetic spectrum.
"If they attack us, what do we do?" Michelle said.
"Learn what we can, while we can.  Fight back.  While we can."
"If we can.  Look out there, Isaac.  I don't care how embryonic that thing is.  Tell me we're not hopelessly outmatched."
"Outmatched, for sure.  Hopelessly, never."
"That's not what you said before."
"Still.  There's always a way to win."
"If I said that, you'd call it wishful thinking."
"If you said that, it would be.  But I'm saying it, so it's game theory."
"Game theory again.  Jesus, Isaac."
"No, listen.  You're thinking about the aliens like they were some kind of mammal.  Something that cares, something that looks after its investments."
"How do you know they aren't?"
"Because you can't protect your kids when they're lightyears away.  They're on their own, and it's a big cold dangerous universe so most of them aren't going to make it, eh?  The most you can do is crank out millions of kids, take cold comfort in knowing that a few always luck out through random chance.  It's not a mammal mind-set, Meesh.  You want an earthbound simile, think of dandelion seeds.  Or, or herring."
A soft sigh.  "So they're interstellar herring.  That hardly means they can't crush us."
"But they don't know about us, not in advance.  Dandelion seed doesn't know what it's up against before it sprouts.  Maybe nothing.  Maybe some spastic weed that goes over like straw in the wind.  Or maybe something that kicks its ass halfway to the Magellanic Clouds.  It doesn't know, and there's no such thing as a one-size-fits-all survival strategy.  Something that aces against one player blows goats against a different one.  So the best you can do is mix up your strategies based on the odds.  It's a weighted dice roll and it gives you the best mean payoff over the whole game, but you're bound to crap out and choose the wrong strategy at least some of the time.  Price of doing business.  And that means—that means—that weak players not only can win against stronger ones, but they're statistically bound to in some cases."
Michelle snorted.  "That's your game theory?  Rock Paper Scissors with statistics?"
Maybe Szpindel didn't know the reference.  He didn't speak, long enough to call up a subtitle; then he brayed like a horse.  "Rock Paper Scissors!  Yes!"
Michelle digested that for a moment.  "You're sweet for trying, but that only works if the other side is just blindly playing the odds, and they don't have to do that if they know who they're going up against in advance.  And my dear, they have so very much information about us..."
They'd threatened Susan.  By name.
"They don't know everything," Szpindel insisted.  "And the principle works for any scenario involving incomplete information, not just the ignorant extreme."
"Not as well."
"But some, and that gives us a chance.  Doesn't matter how good you are at poker when it comes to the deal, eh?  Cards still deal out with the same odds."
"So that's what we're playing.  Poker."
"Be thankful it's not chess.  We wouldn't have a hope in hell."
"Hey.  I'm supposed to be the optimist in this relationship."
"You are.  I'm just fatalistically cheerful.  We all come into the story halfway through, we all catch up as best we can, and we're all gonna die before it ends."
"That's my Isaac.  Master of the no-win scenario."
"You can win.  Winner's the guy who makes the best guess on how it all comes out."
"So you are just guessing."
"Yup.  And you can't make an informed guess without data, eh? And we could be the very first to find out what's gonna happen to the whole Human race.  I'd say that puts us into the semifinals, easy."
Michelle didn't answer for a very long time.  When she did, I couldn't hear her words.
Neither could Szpindel:  "Sorry?"
"Covert to invulnerable, you said.  Remember?"
"Uh huh.  Rorschach's Graduation Day.  "
"How soon, do you think?"
"No idea.  But I don't think it's the kind of thing that's gonna slip by unnoticed.  And that's why I don't think it attacked us."
She must have looked a question.
"Because when it does, it won't be some debatable candy-ass bitch slap," he told her.  "When that fucker rises up, we're gonna know."
A sudden flicker from behind.  I spun in the cramped passageway and bit down on a cry:  something squirmed out of sight around the corner, something with arms, barely glimpsed, gone in an instant.
Never there.  Couldn't be there.  Impossible.
"Did you hear that?" Szpindel asked, but I'd fled to stern before Michelle could answer him.

*

We'd fallen so far that the naked eye didn't see a disk, barely even saw curvature any more.  We were falling towards a wall, a vast roiling expanse of dark thunderclouds that extended in all directions to some new, infinitely-distant horizon.  Ben filled half the universe.
And still we fell.
Far below, Jack clung to Rorschach's ridged surface with bristly gecko-feet fenders and set up camp.  It sent x-rays and ultrasound into the ground, tapped enquiring fingers and listened to the echos, planted tiny explosive charges and measured the resonance of their detonations.  It shed seeds like pollen: tiny probes and sensors by the thousands, self-powered, near-sighted, stupid and expendable.  The vast majority were sacrificial offerings to random chance; only one in a hundred lasted long enough to return usable telemetry.
While our advance scout took measure of its local neighborhood, Theseus drew larger-scale birdseye maps from the closing sky.  It spat out thousands of its own disposable probes, spread them across the heavens and collected stereoscopic data from a thousand simultaneous perspectives.
Patchwork insights assembled in the drum.  Rorschach's skin was sixty percent superconducting carbon nanotube. Rorschach's guts were largely hollow; at least some of those hollows appeared to contain an atmosphere.  No earthly form of life would have lasted a second in there, though;  intricate topographies of  radiation and electromagnetic force seethed around the structure, seethed within it.  In some places the radiation was intense enough to turn unshielded flesh to ash in an instant; calmer backwaters would merely kill in the same span of time.  Charged particles raced around invisible racetracks at relativistic speeds, erupting from jagged openings, hugging curves of magnetic force strong enough for neutron stars, arcing through open space and plunging back into black mass.  Occasional protuberances swelled and burst and released clouds of microparticulates, seeding the radiation belts like spores.  Rorschach resembled nothing so much as a nest of half-naked cyclotrons, tangled one with another.
Neither Jack below nor Theseus above could find any points of entry, beyond those impassable gaps that spat out streams of charged particles or swallowed them back down.  No airlocks or hatches or viewports resolved with increasing proximity.  The fact that we'd been threatened via laser beam implied some kind of optical antennae or tightcast array; we weren't even able to find that much.
A central hallmark of von Neumann machines was self-replication.  Whether Rorschach would meet that criterion—whether it would germinate, or divide, or give birth when it passed some critical threshold—whether it had done so already—remained an open question.  
One of a thousand.  At the end of it all—after all the measurements, the theorizing and deduction and outright guesswork—we settled into orbit with a million trivial details and no answers.  In terms of the big questions, there was only one thing we knew for sure.
So far, Rorschach was holding its fire.

*

"It sounded to me like it knew what it was saying," I remarked.
"I guess that's the whole point," Bates said.  She had no one to confide in, partook of no intimate dialogs that could be overheard.  With her, I used the direct approach.
Theseus was birthing a litter, two by two.  They were nasty-looking things, armored, squashed egg-shapes, twice the size of a human torso and studded with gardening implements: antennae, optical ports, retractable threadsaws.  Weapons muzzles.
Bates was summoning her troops.  We floated before the primary fab port at the base of Theseus' spine.  The plant could just as easily have disgorged the grunts directly into the hold beneath the carapace—that was where they'd be stored anyway, until called upon—but Bates was giving each a visual inspection before sending it through one of the airlocks a few meters up the passageway.  Ritual, perhaps.  Military tradition.  Certainly there was nothing she could see with her eyes that wouldn't be glaringly obvious to the most basic diagnostic.
"Would it be a problem?" I asked.  "Running them without your interface?"
"Run themselves just fine.  Response time actually improves without spam in the network.  I'm more of a safety precaution."
Theseus growled, giving us more attitude.  The plating trembled to stern; another piece of local debris, no longer in our path.  We were angling towards an equatorial orbit just a few miniscule kilometers above the artefact; insanely, the approach curved right through the accretion belt.
It didn't bother the others. "Like surviving traffic in a high speed lane," Sascha had said, disdainful of my misgivings.  "Try creeping across and you're road kill.  Gotta speed up, go with the flow."  But the flow was turbulent; we hadn't gone five minutes without a course correction since Rorschach had stopped talking to us. 
"So, do you buy it?" I asked.  "Pattern-matching, empty threats?  Nothing to worry about?"
"Nobody's fired on us yet," she said.  Meaning:  Not for a second.  
"What's your take on Susan's argument? Different niches, no reason for conflict?"
"Makes sense, I guess."  Utter bullshit.
"Can you think of any reason why something with such different needs would attack us?"
"That depends," she said, "on whether the fact that we are different is reason enough."
I saw playground battlefields reflected in her topology.  I remembered my own, and wondered if there were any other kind.
Then again, that only proved the point.  Humans didn't really fight over skin tone or ideology; those were just handy cues for kin-selection purposes.  Ultimately it always came down to bloodlines and limited resources. 
"I think Isaac would say this is different," I said.
"I guess." Bates sent one grunt humming off to the hold; two more emerged in formation, spinelight glinting off their armor.
"How many of these are you making, anyway?"
"We're breaking and entering, Siri.   Not wise to leave our own house unguarded." 
I inspected her surfaces as she inspected theirs.  Doubt and resentment simmered just beneath.
"You're in a tough spot," I remarked.
"We all are."
"But you're responsible for defending us, against something we don't know anything about.  We're only guessing that—"
"Sarasti doesn't guess," Bates said.  "The man's in charge for a reason.  Doesn't make much sense to question his orders, given we're all about a hundred IQ points short of understanding the answer anyway."
"And yet he's also got that whole predatory side nobody talks about," I remarked.  "It must be difficult for him, all that intellect coexisting with so much instinctive aggression.  Making sure the right part wins."
She wondered in that instant whether Sarasti might be listening in.  She decided in the next that it didn't matter:  why should he care what the cattle thought, as long as they did what they were told?
All she said was, "I thought you jargonauts weren't supposed to have opinions."
"That wasn't mine."
Bates paused.  Returned to her inspection.
"You do know what I do," I said.
"Uh huh."  The first of the current pair passed muster and hummed off up the spine.  She turned to the second.  "You simplify things.  So the folks back home can understand what the specialists are up to."
"That's part of it."
"I don't need a translator, Siri.  I'm just a consultant, assuming things go well.  A bodyguard if they don't."
"You're an officer and a military expert.  I'd say that makes you more than qualified when it comes to assessing Rorschach's threat potential."
"I'm muscle.  Shouldn't you be simplifying Jukka or Isaac?"
"That's exactly what I'm doing."
She looked at me.
"You interact," I said.  "Every component of the system affects every other.   Processing Sarasti without factoring you in would be like trying to calculate acceleration while ignoring mass."
She turned back to her brood.  Another robot passed muster.
She didn't hate me.  What she hated was what my presence implied.
They don't trust us to speak for ourselves, she wouldn't say.  No matter how qualified we are, no matter far ahead of the pack.  Maybe even because of that.  We're contaminated.  We're subjective.  So they send Siri Keeton  to tell them what we really mean.
"I get it," I said after a moment.
"Do you."
"It's not about trust, Major.  It's about location.  Nobody gets a good view of a system from the inside, no matter who they are.  The view's distorted."
"And yours isn't."
"I'm outside the system."
"You're interacting with me now."
"As an observer only.  Perfection's unattainable but it isn't unapproachable, you know?  I don't play a role in decision-making or research, I don't interfere in any aspect of the mission that I'm assigned to study.  But of course I ask questions.  The more information I have, the better my analysis."
"I thought you didn't have to ask.  I thought you guys could just, read the signs or something."
"Every bit helps.  It all goes into the mix."
"You doing it now?  Synthesizing?"
I nodded.
"And you do this without any specialized knowledge at all."
"I'm as much of a specialist as you.  I specialize in processing informational topologies."
"Without understanding their content."
"Understanding the shapes is enough."
Bates seemed to find some small imperfection in the battlebot under scrutiny, scratched at its shell with a fingernail.  "Software couldn't do that without your help?"
"Software can do a lot of things.  We've chosen to do some for ourselves."  I nodded at the grunt.  "Your visual inspections, for example." 
She smiled faintly, conceding the point.
"So I'd encourage you to speak freely.  You know I'm sworn to confidentiality."
"Thanks," she said, meaning On this ship, there's no such thing.
Theseus chimed.  Sarasti spoke in its wake:   "Orbital insertion in fifteen minutes.  Everyone to the drum in five."
"Well," Bates said, sending one last grunt on its way.  "Here we go."  She pushed off and sailed up the spine.
The newborn killing machines clicked at me.  They smelled like new cars.
"By the way," Bates called over her shoulder, "you missed the obvious one." 
"Sorry?"
She spun a hundred-eighty degrees at the end of the passageway, landed like an acrobat beside the drum hatch.  "The reason.  Why something would attack us even if we didn't have anything it wanted."
I read it off her:  "If it wasn't attacking at all.  If it was defending itself."
"You asked about Sarasti.  Smart man.  Strong Leader.  Maybe could spend a little more time with the troops."
Vampire doesn't respect his command.  Doesn't listen to advice.  Hides away half the time.  
I remembered transient killer whales.  "Maybe he's being considerate."  He knows he makes us nervous.
"I'm sure that's it," Bates said.
Vampire doesn't trust himself. 

*

It wasn't just Sarasti.  They all hid from us, even when they had the upper hand.  They always stayed just the other side of myth.
It started pretty much the same way it did for anything else; vampires were far from the first to learn the virtues of energy conservation.  Shrews and hummingbirds, saddled with tiny bodies and overclocked metabolic engines, would have starved to death overnight if not for the torpor that overtook them at sundown.  Comatose elephant seals lurked breathless at the bottom of the sea, rousing only for passing prey or redline lactate levels.  Bears and chipmunks cut costs by sleeping away the impoverished winter months, and lungfish—Devonian black belts in the art of estivation—could curl up and die for years, waiting for the rains.
With vampires it was a little different.  It wasn't shortness of breath, or metabolic overdrive, or some blanket of snow that locked the pantry every winter.  The problem wasn't so much a lack of prey as a lack of difference from it; vampires were such a recent split from the ancestral baseline that the reproductive rates hadn't diverged.  This was no woodland-variety lynx-hare dynamic, where prey outnumbered predators a hundred to one.  Vampires fed on things that bred barely faster than they did.  They would have wiped out their own food supply in no time if they hadn't learned how to ease off on the throttle.
By the time they went extinct they'd learned to shut down for decades.  
It made two kinds of sense.  It not only slashed their metabolic needs while prey bred itself back to harvestable levels, it gave us time to forget that we were prey.  We were so smart by the Pleistocene, smart enough for easy skepticism; if you haven't seen any night-stalking demons in all your years on the savannah, why should you believe some senile campfire ramblings passed down by your mother's mother?
It was murder on our ancestors, even if those same enemy genes—co-opted now—served us so well when we left the sun a half-million years later.  But it was almost—heartening, I guess—to think that maybe Sarasti felt the tug of other genes, some aversion to prolonged visibility shaped by generations of natural selection.  Maybe he spent every moment in our company fighting voices that urged him to hide, hide, let them forget.  Maybe he retreated when they got too loud, maybe we made him as uneasy as he made us.
We could always hope.

*

Our final orbit combined discretion and valor in equal measure.
Rorschach described a perfect equatorial circle 87,900 km from Big Ben's center of gravity.  Sarasti was unwilling to let it out of sight, and you didn't have to be a vampire to mistrust relay sats when swinging through a radiation-soaked blizzard of rock and machinery.  The obvious alternative was to match orbits.
At the same time, all the debate over whether or not Rorschach had meant—or even understood—the threats it had made was a bit beside the point.  Counterintrusion measures were a distinct possibility either way, and ongoing proximity only increased the risk.  So Sarasti had derived some optimum compromise, a mildly eccentric orbit that nearly brushed the artefact at perigee but kept a discreet distance the rest of the time.  It was a longer trajectory than Rorschach's, and higher—we had to burn on the descending arc to keep in synch—but the end result was continuously line-of-sight, and only brought us within striking distance for three hours either side of bottoming out.
Our striking distance, that is.  For all we knew Rorschach could have reached out and swatted us from the sky before we'd even left the solar system.
Sarasti gave the command from his tent. ConSensus carried his voice into the drum as Theseus coasted to apogee:  "Now."
 Jack had erected a tent about itself, a blister glued to Rorschach's hull and blown semi-taut against vacuum with the merest whiff of nitrogen.  Now it brought lasers to bear and started digging; if we'd read the vibrations right, the ground should be only thirty-four centimeters deep beneath its feet.  The beams stuttered as they cut, despite six millimeters of doped shielding.
"Son of a bitch," Szpindel murmured.  "It's working."
We burned through tough fibrous epidermis.  We burned through veins of insulation that might have been some sort of programmable asbestos.  We burned through alternating layers of superconducting mesh, and the strata of flaking carbon separating them.
We burned through.
The lasers shut down instantly.  Within seconds Rorschach's intestinal gases had blown taut the skin of the tent.  Black carbon smoke swirled and danced in sudden thick atmosphere.
Nothing shot back at us.  Nothing reacted.  Partial pressures piled up on ConSensus:  methane, ammonia, hydrogen.  Lots of water vapor, freezing as fast as it registered.
Szpindel grunted.  "Reducing atmosphere.  Pre-Snowball."  He sounded disappointed.
"Maybe it's a work in progress," James suggested.  "Like the structure itself."
"Maybe."
Jack stuck out its tongue, a giant mechanical sperm with a myo-optical tail.  Its head was a thick-skinned lozenge, at least half ceramic shielding by cross-section; the tiny payload of sensors at its core was rudimentary, but small enough for the whole assembly to thread through the pencil-thin hole the laser had cut.  It unspooled down the hole, rimming Rorschach's newly-torn orifice.
"Dark down there," James observed.
Bates:  "But warm."  281?K.  Above freezing.
The endoscope emerged into darkness.  Infrared served up a grainy grayscale of a — a tunnel, it looked like, replete with mist and exotic rock formations.  The walls curved like honeycomb, like the insides of fossilized intestine.  Cul-de-sacs and branches proliferated down the passage.  The basic substrate appeared to be a dense pastry of carbon-fiber leaves.  Some of the gaps between those layers were barely thick as fingernails; others looked wide enough to stack bodies.
"Ladies and gentlemen," Szpindel said softly, "The Devil's Baklava."
I could have sworn I saw something move.  I could have sworn it looked familiar.
The camera died.






Rorschach
    
    

"Mothers are fonder than fathers of their children because they are more certain they are their own." 
 —Aristotle

I couldn't say goodbye to Dad.  I didn't even know where he was.
I didn't want to say goodbye to Helen.  I didn't want to go back there.  That was the problem:  I didn't have to.  There was nowhere left in the world where the mountain couldn't simply pick up and move to Mohammed.  Heaven was merely a suburb of the global village, and the global village left me no excuse.
I linked from my own apartment.  My new inlays—mission-specific, slid into my head just the week before—shook hands with the noosphere and knocked upon the Pearly Gates.  Some tame spirit, more plausible than Saint Peter if no less ethereal, took a message and disappeared.
And I was inside.
This was no antechamber, no visiting room.  Heaven was not intended for the casual visitor; any paradise in which the flesh-constrained would feel at home would have been intolerably pedestrian to the disembodied souls who lived there.  Of course, there was no reason why visitor and resident had to share the same view.  I could have pulled any conventional worldview off the shelf if I'd wanted, seen this place rendered in any style I chose.  Except for the Ascended themselves, of course.  That was one of the perks of the Afterlife:  only they got to choose the face we saw.
But the thing my mother had become had no face, and I was damned if she was going to see me hide behind some mask.
"Hello, Helen."
"Siri!  What a wonderful surprise!"
She was an abstraction in an abstraction:  an impossible intersection of dozens of bright panes, as if the disassembled tiles of a stained-glass window had each been set aglow and animated.  She swirled before me like a school of fish.  Her world echoed her body:  lights and angles and three-dimensional Escher impossibilities, piled like bright thunderheads.  And yet, somehow I would have recognised her anywhere.  Heaven was a dream; only upon waking do you realize that the characters you encountered looked nothing like they do in real life.
There was only one familiar landmark anywhere in the whole sensorium.  My mother's heaven smelled of cinnamon.
I beheld her luminous avatar and imagined the corpus soaking in a tank of nutrients, deep underground.  "How are you doing?"
"Very well.  Very well.  Of course, it takes a little getting used to, knowing your mind isn't quite yours any more."  Heaven didn't just feed the brains of its residents; it fed off  them, used the surplus power of idle synapses to run its own infrastructure.  "You have to move in here, sooner better than later.  You'll never leave."
"Actually, I am leaving," I said.  "We're shipping out tomorrow."
"Shipping out?"
"The Kuiper.  You know.  The Fireflies?"
"Oh yes.  I think I heard something about that.  We don't get much news from the outside world, you know."
"Anyway, just thought I'd call in and say goodbye."
"I'm glad you did.  I've been hoping to see you without, you know."
"Without what?"
"You know.  Without your father listening in."
Not again.
"Dad's in the field, Helen.  Interplanetary crisis.  You might have heard something."
"I certainly have.   You know, I haven't always been happy about your father's—extended assignments, but maybe it was really a blessing in disguise.  The less he was around, the less he could do."
"Do?"
"To you."  The apparition stilled for a few moments, feigning hesitation.  "I've never told you this before, but—no.  I shouldn't."
"Shouldn't what?"
"Bring up, well, old hurts."
"What old hurts?"  Right on cue.  I couldn't help myself, the training went too deep.  I always barked on command.  
"Well," she began, "sometimes you'd come back—you were so very young—and your face would be so set and hard, and I'd wonder why are you so angry, little boy?  What can someone so young have to be so angry about?"
"Helen, what are you talking about?  Back from where?"
"Just from the places he'd take you."  Something like a shiver passed across her facets.  "He was still around back then.  He wasn't so important, he was just an accountant with a karate fetish, going on about forensics and game theory and astronomy until he put everyone to sleep."
I tried to imagine it:  my father, the chatterbox.  "That doesn't sound like Dad."
"Well of course not.  You were too young to remember, but he was just a little man, then.  He still is, really, under all the secret missions and classified briefings.  I've never understood why people never saw that.  But even back then he liked to—well, it wasn't his fault, I suppose.  He had a very difficult childhood, and he never learned to deal with problems like an adult.  He, well, he'd throw his weight around, I guess you'd say.  Of course I didn't know that before we married.  If I had, I—but I made a commitment.  I made a commitment, and I never broke it."
"What, are you saying you were abused?"  Back from the places he'd take you. "Are—are you saying I was?" 
"There are all kinds of abuse, Siri.  Words can hurt more than bullets, sometimes.  And child abandonment—"
"He didn't abandon me."  He left me with you.
"He abandoned us, Siri.  Sometimes for months at a time, and I—and we never knew if he was coming back  And he chose to do that to us, Siri.  He didn't need that job, there were so many other things he was qualified to do.  Things that had been redundant for years."
I shook my head, incredulous, unable to say it aloud:  she hated him because he hadn't had the good grace to grow unnecessary?
"It's not Dad's fault that planetary security is still an essential service," I said.
She continued as if she hadn't heard.  "Now there was a time when it was unavoidable, when people our age had to work just to make ends meet.  But even back then people wanted to spend time with their families.  Even if they couldn't afford to.  To, to choose to stay working when it isn't even necessary, that's—"  She shattered and reassembled at my shoulder.  "Yes, Siri.  I believe that's a kind of abuse.  And if your father had been half as loyal to me as I've been to him all these years..."
I remembered Jim, the last time I'd seen him:  snorting vassopressin under the restless eyes of robot sentries.  "I don't think Dad's been disloyal to either of us."
Helen sighed.  "I don't really expect you to understand.  I'm not completely stupid, I've seen how it played out.  I pretty much had to raise you myself all these years.  I always had to play the heavy, always had to be the one to hand out the discipline because your father was off on some secret assignment.  And then he'd come home for a week or two and he was the golden-haired boy just because he'd seen fit to drop in.  I don't really blame you for that any more than I blame him.  Blame doesn't solve anything at this stage.  I just thought—well, really, I thought you ought to know.  Take it for what it's worth."
A memory, unbidden:  called into Helen's bed when I was nine, her hand stroking my scar, her stale sweet breath stirring against my cheek.  You're the man of the house now Siri.  We can't count on your father any more.  It's just you and me...
I didn't say anything for a while.  Finally:  "Didn't it help at all?"
"What do you mean?"
I glanced around at all that customized abstraction:  internal feedback, lucidly dreamed.  "You're omnipotent in here.  Desire anything, imagine anything; there it is.  I'd thought it would have changed you more."
Rainbow tiles danced, and forced a laugh.  "This isn't enough of a change for you?"
Not nearly.
Because Heaven had a catch.  No matter how many constructs and avatars Helen built in there, no matter how many empty vessels sang her praises or commiserated over the injustices she'd suffered, when it came right down to it she was only talking to herself.  There were other realities over which she had no control, other people who didn't play by her rules—and if they thought of Helen at all, they thought as they damn well pleased.
She could go the rest of her life without ever meeting any of them.  But she knew they were out there, and it drove her crazy.   Taking my leave of Heaven, it occurred to me that omnipotent though she was, there was only be one way my mother would ever be truly happy in her own personal creation.
The rest of creation would have to go.

*

"This shouldn't keep happening," Bates said.  "The shielding was good."
The Gang was up across the drum, squaring away something in their tent.  Sarasti lurked offstage today, monitoring the proceedings from his quarters.  That left me with Bates and Szpindel in the Commons.
"Maybe against direct EM."  Szpindel stretched, stifled a yawn.  "Ultrasound boots up magnetic fields through shielding sometimes, in living tissue at least.  Any chance something like that could be happening with your electronics?"
Bates spread her hands.  "Who knows?  Might as well be black magic and elves down there."
"Well, it's not a total wash.  We can make a few smart guesses, eh?"
"Such as."
Szpindel raised one finger.  "The layers we cut through couldn't result from any metabolic process I know about.  So it's not 'alive', not in the biological sense.  Not that that means anything these days," he added, glancing around the belly of our beast.
"What about life inside the structure?"
"Anoxic atmosphere.  Probably rules out complex multicellular life.  Microbes, maybe, although if so I wish to hell they show up in the samples.  But anything complex enough to think, let alone build something like that"—a wave at the image in ConSensus—"is gonna need a high-energy metabolism, and that means oxygen."
"So you think it's empty?"
"Didn't say that, did I?  I know aliens are supposed to be all mysterious and everything, but I still don't see why anyone would build a city-sized wildlife refuge for anaerobic microbes."
"It's got to be a habitat for something.  Why any atmosphere at all, if it's just some kind of terraforming machine?"
Szpindel pointed up at the Gang's tent.  "What Susan said.  Atmosphere's still under construction and we get a free ride until the owners show up."  
"Free?"
"Freeish.  And I know we've only seen a fraction of a fraction of what's inside.  But something obviously saw us coming.  It yelled at us, as I recall.  If they're smart and they're hostile, why aren't they shooting?"
"Maybe they are."
"If something's hiding down the hall wrecking your robots, it's not frying them any faster than the baseline environment would do anyway."
"What you call a baseline environment might be an active counterintrusion measure.  Why else would a habitat be so uninhabitable?"
Szpindel rolled his eyes.  "Okay, I was wrong.  We don't know enough to make a few smart guesses."
Not that we hadn't tried.  Once Jack's sensor head had been irreparably fried, we'd relegated it to surface excavation; it had widened the bore in infinitesimal increments, patiently burning back the edges of our initial peephole until it measured almost a meter across.  Meanwhile we'd customized Bates's grunts—shielded them against nuclear reactors and the insides of cyclotrons—and come perigee we'd thrown them at Rorschach like stones chucked into a haunted forest.  Each had gone through Jack's portal, unspooling whisker-thin fiberop behind them to pass intelligence through the charged atmosphere.
They'd sent glimpses, mostly.  A few extended vignettes.   We'd seen Rorschach's walls move, slow lazy waves of peristalsis rippling along its gut.   We'd seen treacly invaginations in progress, painstaking constrictions that would presumably, given time, seal off a passageway.   Our grunts had sailed through some quarters, staggered through others where the magnetic ambience threw them off balance.   They'd passed through strange throats lined with razor-thin teeth, thousands of triangular blades in parallel rows, helically twisted.  They'd edged cautiously around clouds of mist sculpted into abstract fractal shapes, shifting and endlessly recursive, their charged droplets strung along a myriad converging lines of  electromagnetic force. 
Ultimately, every one of them had died or disappeared.
"Any way to increase the shielding?" I wondered.  
Szpindel gave me a look.
"We've shielded everything except the sensor heads," Bates explained.  "If we shield those we're blind."
"But visible light's harmless enough.  What about purely optical li—"
"We're using optical links, commissar," Szpindel snapped.  "And you may have noticed the shit's getting through anyway."
"But aren't there, you know—"  I groped for the word— "bandpass filters?  Something that lets visible wavelengths through, cuts out the lethal stuff on both sides?"
He snorted.  "Sure.  It's called an atmosphere, and if we'd brought one with us—about fifty times deeper than Earth's— it might block some of that soup down there.  Course, Earth also gets a lot of help from its magnetic field, but I'm not betting my life on any EM we set up in that place."
"If we didn't keep running into these spikes," Bates said.  "That's the real problem."  
"Are they random?" I wondered.
Szpindel's shrug was half shiver.  "I don't think anything about that place is random.  But who knows?  We need more data."
"Which we're not likely to get," James said, walking around the ceiling to join us, "if our drones keep shorting out."
The conditional was pure formality.  We'd tried playing the odds, sacrificing drone after drone in the hope that one of them would get lucky; survival rates tailed exponentially to zero with distance from base camp.  We'd tried shielding the fiberop to reduce aperture leakage;  the resulting tethers were stiff and unwieldy, wrapped in so many layers of ferroceramic that we were virtually waving the bots around on the end of a stick.  We'd tried cutting the tethers entirely, sending the machines out to explore on their own, squinting against the radiant blizzard and storing their findings for later download; none had returned.  We'd tried everything.
"We can go in ourselves,"  James said.
Almost everything.  
"Right," Szpindel replied in a voice that couldn't mean anything but wrong.
"It's the only way to learn anything useful."
"Yeah.  Like how many seconds it would take your brain to turn into synchrotron soup."
"Our suits can be shielded."
"Oh, you mean like Mandy's drones?"
"I'd really rather you didn't call me that," Bates remarked.
"The point is, Rorschach kills you whether you're meat or mechanical."
"My point is that it kills meat differently," James replied.  "It takes longer."
Szpindel shook his head.  "You'd be good as dead in fifty minutes.  Even shielded.  Even in the so-called cool zones."
"And completely asymptomatic for three hours or more.  And even after that it would take days for us to actually die and we'd be back here long before then, and the ship could patch us up just like that.  We even know that much, Isaac, it's right there in ConSensus.  And if we know it, you know it.  So we shouldn't even be having this argument."
"That's your solution?  We saturate ourselves with radiation every thirty hours and then I get to cut out the tumors and stitch everyone's cells back together?"
"The pods are automatic.  You wouldn't have to lift a finger."
"Not to mention the number those magnetic fields would do on your brain.  We'd be hallucinating from the moment we—"
"Faraday the suits."
"Ah, so we go in deaf dumb and blind.  Good idea."
"We can let light pass.  Infrared—"
"It's all EM, Suze.  Even if we blacked out our helmets completely and used a camera feed, we'd get leakage where the wire went through."
"Some, yes.  But it'd be better than—"
"Jesus."  A tremor sent spittle sailing from the corner of Szpindel's mouth.  "Let me talk to Mi—"
"I've discussed it with the rest of the gang, Isaac.  We're all agreed."
"All agreed?  You don't have a working majority in there, Suze.  Just because you cut your brain into pieces doesn't mean they each get a vote."
"I don't see why not.  We're each at least as sentient as you are."
"They're all you.  Just partitioned."
"You don't seem to have any trouble treating Michelle as a separate individual."
"Michelle's—I mean, yes, you're all very different facets, but there's only one original.  Your alters—"
"Don't call us that." Sascha erupted with a voice cold as LOX.  "Ever."
Szpindel tried to pull back.  "I didn't mean—you know I didn't—"
But Sascha was gone.  "What are you saying?" said the softer voice in her wake.  "Do you think I'm just, I'm just Mom, play-acting?  You think when we're together you're alone with her?"
"Michelle," Szpindel said miserably.  "No.  What I think—"
"Doesn't matter," Sarasti said. "We don't vote here."
He floated above us, visored and unreadable in the center of the drum.  None of us had seen him arrive.  He turned slowly on his axis, keeping us in view as we rotated around him.
"Prepping Scylla.  Amanda needs two untethered grunts with precautionary armament.  Cams from one to a million Angstroms, shielded tympanics, no autonomous circuitry.  Platelet boosters, dimenhydrinate and potassium iodide for everyone by 1350."
"Everyone?"  Bates asked.
Sarasti nodded.  "Window opens four hours twenty-three."  He turned back down the spine
"Not me," I said.
Sarasti paused.
"I don't participate in field ops," I reminded him.
"Now you do."
"I'm a synthesist."  He knew that.  Of course he knew, everyone did:  you can't observe the system unless you stay outside the system.
"On Earth you're a synthesist," he said.  "In the Kuiper you're a synthesist.  Here you're mass.  Do what you're told."
He disappeared.
"Welcome to the big picture," Bates said softly.
I looked at her as the rest of the group broke up.  "You know I—"
"We're a long way out, Siri.  Can't wait fourteen months for feedback from your bosses, and you know it."
She leapt from a standing start, arced smoothly through holograms into the weightless core of the drum.  But then she stopped herself, as if distracted by some sudden insight.  She grabbed a spinal conduit and swung back to face me.
"You shouldn't sell yourself short," she said.  "Or Sarasti either.  You're an observer, right?  It's a safe bet there's going to be a lot down there worth observing."
"Thanks," I said.  But I already knew why Sarasti was sending me into Rorschach, and there was more to it than observation.
Three valuable agents in harm's way.  A decoy bought one-in-four odds that an enemy would aim somewhere else.



 "The Lord will take control of you.  You will dance and shout and become a different person."
 —1 Samuel 10:6

"We were probably fractured during most of our evolution," James once told me, back when we were all still getting acquainted.  She tapped her temple.  "There's a lot of room up here;  a modern brain can run dozens of sentient cores without getting too crowded.  And parallel multitasking has obvious survival advantages."
I nodded.  "Ten heads are better than one."
"Our integration may have actually occurred quite recently.  Some experts think we can still revert to multiples under the right circumstances."
"Well, of course.  You're living proof."
She shook their head.  "I'm not talking about physical  partitioning.  We're the state of the art, certainly, but theoretically surgery isn't even necessary.  Simple stress could do something like it, if it was strong enough.  If it happened early in childhood."
"No kidding."
"Well, in theory,"  James admitted, and changed into Sascha who said, "Bullshit in theory.  There's documented cases as recently as fifty years ago."
"Really."  I resisted the temptation to look it up on my inlays; the unfocused eyes can be a giveaway.  "I didn't know."
"Well it's not like anyone talks about it now.  People were fucking barbarians about multicores back then—called it a disorder, treated it like some kind of disease.  And their idea of a cure was to keep one of the cores and murder all the others.  Not that they called it murder, of course.  They called it integration or some shit.   That's what people did back then: created other people to suck up all the abuse and torture, then got rid of them when they weren't needed any more."
It hadn't been the tone most of us were looking for at an ice-breaking party.  James had gently eased back into the driver's seat and the conversation had steered closer to community standards.
But I hadn't heard any of the Gang use alter to describe each other, then or since.  It had seemed innocuous enough when Szpindel had said it.  I wondered why they'd taken such offence—and now, floating alone in my tent with a few pre-op minutes to kill, there was no one to see my eyes glaze.
Alter carried baggage over a century old, ConSensus told me.  Sascha was right; there'd been a time when MCC was MPD, a Disorder rather than a Complex, and it had never been induced deliberately.  According to the experts of that time, multiple personalities arose spontaneously from unimaginable cauldrons of abuse—fragmentary personae offered up to suffer rapes and beatings while the child behind took to some unknowable sanctuary in the folds of the brain.  It was both survival strategy and ritual self-sacrifice:  powerless souls hacking themselves to pieces, offering up quivering chunks of self in the desperate hope that the vengeful gods called Mom or Dad might not be insatiable.
None of it had been real, as it turned out.  Or at least, none of it had been confirmed.  The experts of the day had been little more than witch doctors dancing through improvised rituals:  meandering free-form interviews full of leading questions and nonverbal cues, scavenger hunts through regurgitated childhoods.  Sometimes a shot of lithium or haloperidol when the beads and rattles didn't work.  The technology to map minds was barely off the ground; the technology to edit them was years away.  So the therapists and psychiatrists poked at their victims and invented names for things they didn't understand, and argued over the shrines of Freud and Klein and the old Astrologers.  Doing their very best to sound like practitioners of Science.  
Inevitably, it was Science that turned them all into road kill; MPD was a half-forgotten fad even before the advent of synaptic rewiring.  But alter was a word from that time, and its resonance had persisted.  Among those who remembered the tale, alter was codespeak for betrayal and human sacrifice.  Alter meant cannon fodder.
Imagining the topology of the Gang's coexisting souls, I could see why Sascha embraced the mythology.  I could see why Susan let her.  After all, there was nothing implausible about the concept; the Gang's very existence proved that much.  And when you've been peeled off from a pre-existing entity, sculpted from nonexistence straight into adulthood—a mere fragment of personhood, without even a full-time body to call your own—you can be forgiven a certain amount of anger.  Sure you're all equal, all in it together.  Sure, no persona is better than any other.  Susan's still the only one with a surname.
Better to direct that resentment at old grudges, real or imagined; less problematic, at least, than taking it out on someone who shares the same flesh.
I realized something else, too.  Surrounded by displays documenting the relentless growth of the leviathan beneath us, I could not only see why Sascha had objected to the word; I could also see why Isaac Szpindel, no doubt unconsciously, had spoken it in the first place.
As far as Earth was concerned, everyone on Theseus was an alter.

*

Sarasti stayed behind.  He hadn't come with a backup.
There were the rest of us, though, crammed into the shuttle, embedded in custom spacesuits so padded with shielding we might have been deep-sea divers from a previous century.  It was a fine balance; too much shielding would have been worse than none at all, would split primary particles into secondary ones, just as lethal and twice as numerous.  Sometimes you had to live with moderate exposure; the only alternative was to embed yourself like a bug in lead. 
We launched six hours from perigee.  Scylla raced on ahead like an eager child, leaving its parent behind.  There was no eagerness in the systems around me, though.  Except for one:  the Gang of Four almost shimmered behind her faceplate.  
"Excited?" I asked.
Sascha answered:  "Fuckin' right.  Field work, Keeton.  First contact."
"What if there's nobody there?"  What if there is, and they don't like us?
"Even better.  We get a crack at their signs and cereal boxes without their traffic cops leaning over our shoulders."
I wondered if she spoke for the others.  I was pretty sure she didn't speak for Michelle.
Scylla's ports had all been sealed.  There was no outside view, nothing to see inside but bots and bodies and the tangled silhouette swelling on my helmet HUD.  But I could feel the radiation slicing through our armor as if it were tissue paper.  I could feel the knotted crests and troughs of Rorschach's magnetic field.  I could feel Rorschach itself, drawing nearer:  the charred canopy of some firestormed alien forest, more landscape than artefact.  I imagined titanic bolts of electricity arcing between its branches.  I imagined getting in the way.
What kind of creatures would choose to live in such a place?
"You really think we'll get along," I said.
James' shrug was all but lost under the armor.  "Maybe not at first.  We may have gotten off on the wrong foot, we might have to sort through all kinds of misunderstandings.  But we'll figure each other out eventually."
Evidently she thought that had answered my question.
The shuttle slewed; we bumped against each other like tenpins.  Thirty seconds of micromaneuvers brought us to a solid stop.  A cheery animation played across the HUD in greens and blues: the shuttle's docking seal, easing through the membrane that served as our entrance into Rorschach's inflatable vestibule.  Even as a cartoon it looked vaguely pornographic.
Bates had been prepacked next to the airlock.  She slid back the inner door.  "Everybody duck."
Not an easy maneuver, swaddled in life-support and ferroceramic.  Helmets tilted and bumped.  The grunts, flattened overhead like great lethal cockroaches, hummed to life and disengaged from the ceiling.  They scraped past in the narrow headroom, bobbed cryptically to their mistress, and exited stage left.
Bates closed the inner hatch.  The lock cycled, opened again on an empty chamber.
Everything nominal, according to the board.  The drones waited patiently in the vestibule.  Nothing had jumped out at them.
Bates followed them through. 
We had to wait forever for the image.  The baud rate was less than a trickle.  Words moved back and forth easily enough—"No surprises so far," Bates reported in distorted Jews-harp vibrato—but any picture was worth a million of them, and—
There:  through the eyes of the grunt behind we saw the grunt ahead in motionless, grainy monochrome.   It was a postcard from the past: sight turned to sound, thick clumsy vibrations of methane bumping against the hull.  It took long seconds for each static-ridden image to accrete on the HUD:  grunts descending into the pit; grunts emerging into Rorschach's duodenum; a cryptic, hostile cavescape in systematic increments.  Down in the lower left-hand corner of each image, timestamps and Teslas ran down the clock.
You give up a lot when you don't trust the EM spectrum.
"Looks good," Bates reported.  "Going in."
In a friendlier universe machines would have cruised the boulevard, sending perfect images in crystal resolution.  Szpindel and the Gang would be sipping coffee back in the drum, telling the grunts to take a sample of this or get a close-up of that.  In a friendlier universe, I wouldn't even be here.
Bates appeared in the next postcard, emerging from the fistula.  In the next her back was to the camera, apparently panning the perimeter.  
In the one after that she was looking right at us.
"Oh...okay," she said.  "Come on...down..."
"Not so fast," Szpindel said.  "How are you feeling?"
"Fine.  A bit—odd, but..."
"Odd how?"  Radiation sickness announced itself with nausea, but unless we'd seriously erred in our calculations that wouldn't happen for another hour or two.  Not until well after we'd all been lethally cooked.
"Mild disorientation," Bates reported.  "It's a bit spooky in here, but—must be Grey Syndrome.  It's tolerable."
I looked at the Gang.  The Gang looked at Szpindel.  Szpindel shrugged.
"It's not gonna get any better," Bates said from afar.  "The clock is... clock is ticking, people.  Get down here."
We got.

*

Not living, not by a long shot.
Haunted.
Even when the walls didn't move, they did:  always at the corner of the eye, that sense of crawling motion.  Always at the back of the mind the sense of being watched, the dread certainty of malign and alien observers just out of sight.  More than once I turned, expecting to catch one of those phantoms in the open.  All I ever saw was a half-blind grunt floating down the passageway, or a wide-eyed and jittery crewmate returning my stare.  And the walls of some glistening black lava tube with a hundred embedded eyes, all snapped shut just the instant before.  Our lights pushed the darkness back perhaps twenty meters in either direction; beyond, mist and shadows seethed.  And the sounds—Rorschach creaked around us like some ancient wooden hull trapped in pack ice.  Electricity hissed like rattlesnakes.
You tell yourself it's mostly in your head.  You remind yourself it's well-documented, an inevitable consequence of meat and magnetism brought too close together.  High-energy fields release the ghosts and the grays from your temporal lobe, dredge up paralyzing dread from the midbrain to saturate the conscious mind.  They fuck with your motor nerves and make even dormant inlays sing like fine fragile crystal.
Energy artefacts.  That's all they are.  You repeat that to yourself, you repeat it so often it loses any pretense of rationality and devolves into rote incantation, a spell to ward off evil spirits.  They're not real, these whispering voices just outside your helmet, those half-seen creatures flickering at the edge of vision.  They're tricks of the mind, the same neurological smoke-and-mirrors that convinced people throughout the ages that they were being haunted by ghosts, abducted by aliens, hunted by—
—vampires—
—and you wonder whether Sarasti really stayed behind or if he was here all along, waiting for you...
"Another spike," Bates warned as Tesla and Seiverts surged on my HUD. "Hang on."
I was installing the Faraday bell.  Trying to.  It should have been simple enough;  I'd already run the main anchor line down from the vestibule to the flaccid sack floating in the middle of the passageway.  I was—that's right, something about a spring line.  To, to keep the bell centered.  The wall glistened in my headlamp like wet clay.  Satanic runes sparkled in my imagination.
I jammed the spring line's pad against the wall.  I could have sworn the substrate flinched.  I fired my thrust pistol, retreated back to the center of the passage.
"They're here," James whispered.
Something was.  I could feel it always behind me, no matter where I turned.  I could feel some great roaring darkness swirling just out of sight, a ravenous mouth as wide as the tunnel itself. Any moment now it would lunge forward at impossible speed and engulf us all.
"They're beautiful..." James said.  There was no fear in her voice at all.  She sounded awestruck.
"What?  Where?"  Bates never stopped turning, kept trying to keep the whole three-sixty in sight at once.  The drones under her command wobbled restlessly to either side, armored parentheses pointing down the passageway in opposite directions.  "What do you see?"
"Not out there.  In here.  Everywhere.  Can't you see it?"
"I can't see anything," Szpindel said, his voice shaking.
"It's in the EM fields," James said.  "That's how they communicate.  The whole structure is full of language, it's—"
"I can't see anything," Szpindel repeated.  His breath echoed loud and fast over the link. "I'm blind."
"Shit."  Bates swung on Szpindel.  "How can that—the radiation—"
"I d-don't think that's it.."
Nine Tesla, and the ghosts were everywhere.  I smelled asphalt and honeysuckle.
"Keeton!"  Bates called.  "You with us?"
"Y-yeah."  Barely.  I was back at the bell, my hand on the ripcord.  Trying to ignore whatever kept tapping me on the shoulder.
"Leave that!  Get him outside!"
"No!" Szpindel floated helplessly in the passage, his pistol bouncing against its wrist tether.  "No, throw me something."
"What?"
It's all in your head.  It's all in your—
"Throw something!  Anything!"  
Bates hesitated.  "You said you were bli—"
"Just do it!"
Bates pulled a spare suit battery off her belt and lobbed it.  Szpindel reached, fumbled.  The battery slipped from his grasp and bounced off the wall.
"I'll be okay," he gasped.  "Just get me into the tent."
I yanked the cord.  The bell inflated  like a great gunmetal marshmallow.
"Everyone inside!" Bates ran her pistol with one hand, grabbed Szpindel with the other.  She handed him off to me and slapped a sensor pod onto the skin of the tent.  I pulled back the shielded entrance flap as though pulling a scab from a wound.  The single molecule beneath, infinitely long, endlessly folded against itself, swirled and glistened like a soap bubble.
"Get him in.  James!  Get down here!"
I pushed Szpindel through the membrane.  It split around him with airtight intimacy, hugged each tiny crack and contour as he passed through.
"James!  Are you—"
"Get it off me!"  Harsh voice, raw and scared and scary, as male as female could sound. Cruncher in control. "Get it off!"
I looked back.  Susan James' body tumbled slowly in the tunnel, grasping its right leg with both hands.
"James!"  Bates sailed over to the other woman.  "Keeton! Help out!"  She took the Gang by the arm. "Cruncher?  What's the problem?"
"That! You blind?"  He wasn't just grasping at the limb, I realized as I joined them.  He was tugging at it.  He was trying to pull it off.
Something laughed hysterically, right inside my helmet.
"Take his arm," Bates told me, taking his right one, trying to pry the fingers from their death grip on the Gang's leg.  "Cruncher, let go.  Now."
"Get it off me!"
"It's your leg, Cruncher."  We wrestled our way towards the diving bell. 
"It's not my leg!  Just look at it, how could it—it's dead.  It's stuck to me..."
Almost there.  "Cruncher, listen," Bates snapped.  "Are you with m—"
"Get it off!"
We stuffed the Gang into the tent.  Bates moved aside as I dove in after them.  Amazing, the way she held it together.  Somehow she kept the demons at bay, herded us to shelter like a border collie in a thunderstorm.  She was—
She wasn't following us in.  She wasn't even there.  I turned to see her body floating outside the tent, one gloved hand grasping the edge of the flap; but even under all those layers of Kapton and Chromel and polycarbonate, even behind the distorted half-reflections on her faceplate, I could tell that something was missing.  All her surfaces had just disappeared.  
This couldn't be Amanda Bates.  The thing before me had no more topology than a mannequin.
"Amanda?"  The Gang gibbered at my back, softly hysteric.
Szpindel:  "What's happening?"
"I'll stay out here," Bates said.  She had no affect whatsoever.  "I'm dead anyway."
"Wha—"  Szpindel had lots.  "You will be, if you don't—"
"You leave me here," Bates said.  "That's an order."
She sealed us in.

*

It wasn't the first time, not for me.  I'd had invisible fingers poking through my brain before, stirring up the muck, ripping open the scabs.  It was far more intense when Rorschach did it to me, but Chelsea was more—
—precise, I guess you'd say.
Macramé, she called it:  glial jumpstarts, cascade effects, the splice and dice of critical ganglia.  While I trafficked in the reading of Human architecture, Chelsea changed it—finding the critical nodes and nudging them just so, dropping a pebble into some trickle at the headwaters of memory and watching the ripples build to a great rolling cascade deep in the downstream psyche.  She could hotwire happiness in the time it took to fix a sandwich, reconcile you with your whole childhood in the course of a lunch hour or three.
Like so many other domains of human invention, this one had learned to run without her.  Human nature was becoming an assembly-line edit, Humanity itself increasingly relegated from Production to product.  Still.  For me, Chelsea's skill set recast a strange old world in an entirely new light:  the cut-and-paste of minds not for the greater good of some abstract society, but for the simple selfish wants of the individual.
"Let me give you the gift of happiness," she said.
"I'm already pretty happy."
"I'll make you happier.  A TAT, on me."
"Tat?"
"Transient Attitudinal Tweak.  I've still got privileges at Sax."
"I've been tweaked plenty.  Change one more synapse and I might turn into someone else."
"That's ridiculous and you know it.  Or every experience you had would turn you into a different person."
I thought about that.  "Maybe it does."
But she wouldn't let it go, and even the strongest anti-happiness argument was bound to be an uphill proposition; so one afternoon Chelsea fished around in her cupboards and dredged up a hair-net studded with greasy gray washers.  The net was a superconducting spiderweb, fine as mist, that mapped the fields of merest thought.  The washers were ceramic magnets that bathed the brain in fields of their own.   Chelsea's inlays linked to a base station that played with the interference patterns between the two.
"They used to need a machine the size of a bathroom just to house the magnets."  She laid me back on the couch and stretched the mesh across my skull.  "That's the only outright miracle you get with a portable setup like this.  We can find hot spots, and we can even zap 'em if they need zapping, but TMS effects fade after a while.  We'll have to go to a clinic for anything permanent."
"So we're fishing for what, exactly?  Repressed memories?"
"No such thing."  She grinned in toothy reassurance.  "There are only memories we choose to ignore, or kinda think around, if you know what I mean."
"I thought this was the gift of happiness.  Why—"
She laid a fingertip across my lips. "Believe it or not, Cyggers, people sometimes choose to ignore even good memories.  Like, say, if they enjoyed something they didn't think they should.  Or—" she kissed my forehead— "if they don't think they deserve to be happy."
"So we're going for—"
"Potluck.  You can never tell 'til you get a bite.  Close your eyes."  
A soft hum started up somewhere between my ears.  Chelsea's voice led me on through the darkness.  "Now keep in mind, memories aren't historical archives.   They're—improvisations, really.  A lot of the stuff you associate with a particular event might be factually wrong, no matter how clearly you remember it.  The brain has a funny habit of building composites.  Inserting details after the fact.  But that's not to say your memories aren't true, okay?  They're  an honest reflection of how you saw the world, and every one of them went into shaping how you see it.  But they're not photographs.  More like impressionist paintings.  Okay?"
"Okay."
"Ah," she said.  "There's something."
"What?"
"Functional cluster. Getting a lot of low-level use but not enough to intrude into conscious awareness.  Let's just see what happens when we—"
And I was ten years old, and I was home early and I'd just let myself into the kitchen and the smell of burned butter and garlic hung in the air.  Dad and Helen were fighting in the next room.  The flip-top on our kitchen-catcher had been left up, which was sometimes enough to get Helen going all by itself.  But they were fighting about something else; Helen only wanted what was best for all of us but Dad said there were limits and this was not the way to go about it.  And Helen said you don't know what it's like you hardly ever even see him and then I knew they were fighting about me.  Which in and of itself was nothing unusual.
What really scared me was that for the first time ever, Dad was fighting back.
"You do not force something like that onto someone.  Especially without their knowledge."  My father never shouted—his voice was as low and level as ever—but it was colder than I'd ever heard, and hard as iron.
"That's just garbage," Helen said.  "Parents always make decisions for their children, in their best interests, especially when it comes to medical iss—"
"This is not a medical issue." This time my father's voice did rise.  "It's—"
"Not a medical issue!  That's a new height of denial even for you!  They cut out half his brain in case you missed it!  Do you think he can recover from that without help?  Is that more of your father's tough love shining through?  Why not just deny him food and water while you're at it!"
"If mu-ops were called for they'd have been prescribed."
I felt my face scrunching at the unfamiliar word.  Something small and white beckoned from the open garbage pail.
"Jim, be reasonable.  He's so distant, he barely even talks to me."
"They said it would take time."
"But two years!  There's nothing wrong with helping nature along a little, we're not even talking black market.  It's over-the-counter, for God's sake!"
"That's not the point."
An empty pill bottle.  That's what one of them had thrown out, before forgetting to close the lid.  I salvaged it from the kitchen discards and sounded out the label in my head.
"Maybe the point should be that someone who's barely home three months of the year has got his bloody nerve passing judgment on my parenting skills.  If you want a say in how he's raised, then you can damn well pay some dues first.  Until then, just fuck right off."
"You will not put that shit into my son ever again," my father said.

Bondfast™ Formula IV
?-OPIOID RECEPTOR PROMOTERS / MATERNAL RESPONSE STIMULANT
"Strengthening ties between Mother and Child  since 2042"

"Yeah?  And how are you going to stop me, you little geek?  You can't even make the time to find out what's going on in your own family;  you think you can control me all the way from fucking orbit?  You think—"
Suddenly, nothing came from the living room but soft choking sounds.  I peeked around the corner.
My father had Helen by the throat.
"I think," he growled, "that I can stop you from doing anything to Siri ever again, if I have to.  And I think you know that."
And then she saw me.  And then he did.  And my father took his hand from around my mother's neck, and his face was utterly unreadable.
But there was no mistaking the triumph on hers.

*

I was up off the couch, the skullcap clenched in one hand.  Chelsea stood wide-eyed before me, the butterfly still as death on her cheekbone.
She took my hand.  "Oh, God.  I'm so sorry."
"You—you saw that?"
"No, of course not.  It can't read minds.  But that obviously— wasn't a happy memory."
"It wasn't all that bad."
I felt sharp, disembodied pain from somewhere nearby, like an ink spot on a white tablecloth.  After a moment I fixed it:  teeth in my lip.
She ran her hand up my arm.  "It really stressed you out.  Your vitals were—are you okay?"
"Yeah, of course.  No big deal."  Tasting salt. "I am curious about something, though."
"Ask me."
"Why would you do this to me?"
"Because we can make it go away, Cygnus.  That's the whole point.  Whatever that was, whatever you didn't like about it, we know where it is now.  We can go back in and damp it out just like that.  And then we've got days to get it removed permanently, if that's what you want.  Just put the cap back on and—"
She put her arms around me, drew me close.  She smelled like sand, and sweat.  I loved the way she smelled.  For a while, I could feel a little bit safe.  For a while I could feel like the bottom wasn't going to drop out at any moment.  Somehow, when I was with Chelsea, I mattered.
I wanted her to hold me forever.  
"I don't think so," I said.
"No?" She blinked, looked up at me.  "Why ever not?"
I shrugged.  "You know what they say about people who don't remember the past."
"Predators run for their dinner.  Prey run for their lives."
—Old Ecologist's Proverb

We were blind and helpless, jammed into a fragile bubble behind enemy lines.   But finally the whisperers were silent.  The monsters had stayed beyond the covers.  
And Amanda Bates was out there with them.
"What the fuck," Szpindel breathed.
The eyes behind his faceplate were active and searching.  "You can see?" I asked.
He nodded.  "What happened to Bates? Her suit breach?"
"I don't think so."
"Then why'd she say she was dead?  What—"
"She meant it literally,"  I told him.  "Not I'm as good as dead or I'm going to die.  She meant dead now. Like she was a talking corpse."
"How do—" you know?   Stupid question.  His face ticced and trembled in the helmet.  "That's crazy, eh?"
"Define crazy."
The Gang floated quietly, cheek-to-jowl behind Szpindel in the cramped enclosure.  Cruncher had stopped obsessing about the leg as soon as we'd sealed up.  Or maybe he'd simply been overridden; I thought I saw facets of Susan in the twitching of those thick gloved fingers.
Szpindel's breath echoed second-hand over the link.  "If Bates is dead, then so are we."
"Maybe not.  We wait out the spike, we get out of here.  Besides," I added, "she wasn't dead.  She only said she was."
"Fuck," Szpindel reached out and pressed his gloved palm against the skin of the tent.  He felt back and forth along the fabric.  "Someone did put out a transducer—"
"Eight o'clock," I said.  "About a meter."  Szpindel's hand came to rest across the wall from the pod.  My HUD flooded with second-hand numbers, vibrated down his arm and relayed to our suits.  
Still five Tesla out there.  Falling, though.   The tent expanded around us as if breathing, shrank back in the next second as some transient low-pressure front moved past.
"When did your sight come back?" I wondered.  
"Soon as we came inside." 
"Sooner.  You saw the battery."
"Fumbled it."  He grunted.  "Not that I'm much less of a spaz even when I'm not blind, eh?  Bates!  You out there?"
"You reached for it.  You almost caught it.  That wasn't blind chance."
"Not blind chance. Blindsight.  Amanda?  Respond, please."
"Blindsight?"
"Nothing wrong with the receptors," he said distractedly.  "Brain processes the image but it can't access it.  Brain stem takes over."
"Your brainstem can see but you can't?"
"Something like that.  Shut up and let me—Amanda, can you hear me?"
"...No..." 
Not from anyone in the tent, that voice.  It had shivered down Szpindel's arm, barely audible, with the rest of the data.  From outside.
"Major Mandy!" Szpindel exclaimed.  "You're alive!"
"....no..."  A whisper like white noise.
"Well you're talking to us, so you sure as shit ain't dead."
"No..."
Szpindel and I exchanged looks.  "What's the problem, Major?"
Silence.  The Gang bumped gently against the wall behind us, all facets opaque.
"Major Bates?  Can you hear me?"
"No."  It was a dead voice— sedated, trapped in a fishbowl, transmitted through limbs and lead at a three-digit baud rate.  But it was definitely Bates' voice.
"Major, you've got to get in here," Szpindel said.  "Can you come inside?"
"...No...".
"Are you injured?  Are you pinned by something?"
"..N—no."
Maybe not her voice, after all.  Maybe just her vocal cords. 
"Look. Amanda, it's dangerous.  It's too damn hot out there, do you understand?  You—"
"I'm not out here," said the voice.  
"Where are you?"
"...nowhere."
I looked at Szpindel.  Szpindel looked at me.  Neither of us spoke.
James did.  At long last, and softly:  "And what are you, Amanda?"
No answer.
"Are you Rorschach?"
Here in the belly of the beast, it was so easy to believe.
"No..."
"Then what?"
"N...nothing."   The voice was flat and mechanical.  "I'm nothing."
"You're saying you don't exist?" Szpindel said slowly.
"Yes."
The tent breathed around us.
"Then how can you speak?" Susan asked the voice.  "If you don't exist, what are we talking to?"
"Something...else."  A sigh.  A breath of static.  "Not me."
"Shit," Szpindel muttered.  His surfaces brightened with resolve and sudden insight.  He pulled his hand from the wall; my HUD thinned instantly.  "Her brain's frying.  We gotta get her inside."  He reached for the release. 
I put out my own hand.  "The spike—"
"Crested already, commissar.  We're past the worst of it."
"Are you saying it's safe?"
"It's lethal.  It's always lethal, and she's out there in it, and she could do some serious damage to herself in her pres—"
Something bumped the tent from the outside.  Something grabbed the outer catch and pulled.
Our shelter opened like an eye.  Amanda Bates looked in at us through the exposed membrane.  "I'm reading three point eight," she said.  "That's tolerable, right?"
Nobody moved.
"Come on, people.  Break's over."
"Ama—"  Szpindel stared.  "Are you okay?"
"In here?  Not likely.  But we've got a job to do."
"Do you—exist?" I asked.
"What kind of stupid question is that?  Szpindel, how's this field strength?  Can we work in it?"
"Uh..." He swallowed audibly. "Maybe we should abort, Major.  That spike was—"
"According to my readings, the spike is pretty much over.  And we've got less than two hours to finish setting up, run our ground truths, and get out of here.  Can we do that without hallucinating?"
"I don't think we'll shake the heebie-jeebies," Szpindel admitted.  "But we shouldn't have to worry about —extreme effects— until another spike hits."
"Good."
"Which could be any time."
"We weren't hallucinating,"  James said quietly.
"We can discuss it later," Bates said.  "Now—"
"There was a pattern there," James insisted.  "In the fields.  In my head.  Rorschach was talking.  Maybe not to us, but it was talking."
"Good."  Bates pushed herself back to let us pass.  "Maybe now we can finally learn to talk back."
"Maybe we can learn to listen," James said.

*

We fled like frightened children with brave faces.  We left a base camp behind:  Jack, still miraculously functional in its vestibule; a tunnel into the haunted mansion; forlorn magnetometers left to die in the faint hope they might not.  Crude pyronometers and thermographs, antique radiation-proof devices that measured the world through the flex and stretch of metal tabs and etched their findings on rolls of plastic.  Glow-globes and diving bells and guide ropes strung one to another.  We left it all behind, and promised to return in thirty-six hours if we lived so long.
Inside each of us, infinitesimal lacerations were turning our cells to mush.  Plasma membranes sprang countless leaks.  Overwhelmed repair enzymes clung desperately to shredded genes and barely delayed the inevitable.  Anxious to avoid the rush, patches of my intestinal lining began flaking away before the rest of the body had a chance to die.
By the time we docked with Theseus both Michelle and I were feeling nauseous.  (The rest of the Gang, oddly, was not; I had no idea how that was possible.)  The others would be presenting the same symptoms within minutes.  Without intervention we would all be vomiting our guts out for the following two days.  Then the body would pretend to recover;  for perhaps a week we would feel no pain and have no future.  We would walk and talk and move like any living thing, and perhaps convince ourselves that we were immortal after all.  
Then we would collapse into ourselves, rotted from the inside out.  We would bleed from our eyes and mouths and assholes, and if any God was merciful we would die before splitting open like rotten fruit.
But of course Theseus, our redeemer, would save us from such a fate.  We filed from the shuttle into a great balloon that Sarasti had erected to capture our personal effects; we shed our contaminated space suits and clothing and emerged naked into the spine.  We passed single-file through the drum, the Flying Dead in formation.  Jukka Sarasti—discreetly distant on the turning floor—leapt up in our wake and disappeared aft, to feed our radioactive cast-offs into the decompiler.
Into the crypt.  Our coffins lay open across the rear bulkhead.  We sank gratefully and wordlessly into their embrace.  Bates coughed blood as the lids came down.
My bones hummed as the Captain began to shut me off.  I went to sleep a dead man.  I had only theory and the assurances of fellow machinery that I would ever be born again.

*

Keeton, come forth.
I woke up ravenous.  Faint voices drifted forward from the drum.  I floated in my pod for a few moments, eyes closed, savoring absences:  no pain, no nausea.  No terrifying subliminal sense of one's own body sloughing incrementally to mush.  Weakness, and hunger; otherwise I felt fine.
I opened my eyes.
Something like an arm.  Grey and glistening, far too— too attenuate to be human.  No hand at its tip.  Too many joints, a limb broken in a dozen places.  It extended from a body barely visible over the lip of the pod, a suggestion of dark bulk and other limbs in disjoint motion.  It hovered motionless before me, as if startled in the midst of some shameful act. 
By the time I had breath enough to cry out, it had whipped back out of sight.
I erupted from the pod, eyes everywhere.  Now they saw nothing:  an empty crypt, a naked note-taker.  The mirrored bulkhead reflected vacant pods to either side.  I called up ConSensus:  all systems nominal. 
It didn't reflect, I remembered.  The mirror didn't show it.  
I headed aft, heart still pounding.  The drum opened around me, Szpindel and the Gang conversing in low tones aft.  Szpindel glanced up and waved a trembling hand in greeting.
"You need to check me out," I called.  My voice wasn't nearly so steady as I'd hoped.
"Admitting you have a problem is the first step," Szpindel called back.  "Just don't expect miracles."  He turned back to the Gang;  James on top, they sat in a diagnostic couch staring at some test pattern shimmering on the rear bulkhead.  
I grabbed the tip of a stairway and pulled myself down.  Coriolis pushed me sideways like a flag in the breeze.  "I'm either hallucinating or there's something on board."
"You're hallucinating."
"I'm serious."
"So am I.  Take a number.  Wait your turn."
He was serious.  Once I forced myself to calm down and read the signs, I could see he wasn't even surprised.
"Guess you're pretty hungry after all that exhausting lying around, eh?"  Szpindel waved at the galley.  "Eat something.  Be with you in a few minutes."
  I forced myself to work up my latest synopsis while I ate, but that only took half a mind; the other still shivered in residual thrall to fight-flight.  I tried to distract it by tapping the BioMed feed.
"It was real,"  James was saying.  "We all saw it."
No.  Couldn't have been.
Szpindel cleared his throat.  "Try this one."
The feed showed what she saw:  a small black triangle on a white background.  In the next instant it shattered into a dozen identical copies, and a dozen dozen.  The proliferating brood rotated around the center screen, geometric primitives ballroom-dancing in precise formation, each sprouting smaller triangles from its tips, fractalizing, rotating, evolving into an infinite, intricate tilework...
A sketchpad, I realized.  An interactive eyewitness reconstruction, without the verbiage.  Susan's own pattern-matching wetware reacted to what she saw— no, there were more of them; no, the orientation's wrong; yes, that's it, but bigger— and  Szpindel's machine picked those reactions right out of her head and amended the display in realtime.   It was a big step up from that half-assed workaround called language.  The easily-impressed might have even called it mind-reading.
It wasn't, though.  It was all just feedback and correlation.  It doesn't take a telepath to turn one set of patterns into another.  Fortunately.
"That's it!  That's it!" Susan cried.
The triangles had iterated out of existence.  Now the display was full of interlocking asymmetrical pentagrams, a spiderweb of fish scales.
"Don't tell us that's random noise," she said triumphantly.
"No," Szpindel said, "It's a Klüver constant."
"A—"
"It's a hallucination, Suze."
"Of course.  But something planted it in our head, right?  And—"
"It was in your head all along.  It was in your head the day you were born."
"No."
"It's an artefact of deep brain structure.  Even congenitally blind people see them sometimes."
"None of us have seen them before.  Ever."
"I believe you.  But there's no information there, eh?  That wasn't Rorschach talking, it was just—interference.  Like everything else."
"But it was so vivid!  Not that flickering corner-of-your-eye stuff we saw everywhere.  This was solid.  It was realer than real."
"That's how you can tell it wasn't.  Since you don't actually see it, there's no messy eyeball optics to limit resolution." 
"Oh," James said, and then, softly: "Shit."
"Yeah.  Sorry."  And then, "Any time you're ready."
I looked up; Szpindel was waving me over.  James rose from her chair, but it was Michelle who gave him a quick disconsolate squeeze and Sascha who grumbled past me on her way to their tent.
By the time I reached him Szpindel had unfolded the couch into a half-cot.  "Lie down."
I did.  "I wasn't talking about back in Rorschach, you know.  I meant here.  I saw something right now.  When I woke up."
"Raise your left hand,"  he said.  Then:  "Just your left, eh?"
I lowered my right, winced at the pinprick.  "That's a bit primitive."
He eyed the blood-filled cuvette between his thumb and forefinger:  a shivering ruby teardrop the size of a fingernail.  "Wet sample's still best for some things."
"Aren't the pods supposed to do everything?"
Szpindel nodded.  "Call it a quality-control test.  Keep the ship on its toes."  He dropped the sample onto the nearest countertop.  The teardrop flattened and burst; the surface drank my blood  as if parched.  Szpindel smacked his lips.  "Elevated cholinesterase inhibitors in the ret.  Yum."
For all I knew, my blood results actually did taste good to the man.  Szpindel didn't just read results; he felt them, smelled and saw and experienced each datum like drops of citrus on the tongue.  The whole BioMed subdrum was but a part of the Szpindel prosthesis:  an extended body with dozens of different sensory modes, forced to talk to a brain that knew only five.
No wonder he'd bonded with Michelle.  He was almost synesthesiac himself.
"You spent a bit longer in there than the rest of us," he remarked.
"That's significant?"
A jerking shrug. "Maybe your organs got a bit more cooked than ours.  Maybe you just got a delicate constitution.  Your pod would've caught anything—imminent, so I figure—ah."
"What?"
"Some cells along your brainpan going into overdrive.  More in your bladder and kidney."
"Tumors?"
"What you expect?  Rorschach's no rejuve spa."
"But the pod—"
Szpindel grimaced; his idea of a reassuring smile.  "Repairs ninety-nine point nine percent of the damage, sure.  By the time you get to the last zero-point-one, you're into diminishing returns.  These're small, commissar.  Chances are your own body'll take care of  'em.  If not, we know where they live."
"The ones in my brain.  Could they be causing—"
"Not a chance."  He chewed on his lower lip for a moment.  "Course, cancer's not all that thing did to us."
"What I saw.  Up in the crypt.  It had these multijointed arms from a central mass.  Big as a person, maybe."
Szpindel nodded.  "Get used to it."
"The others are seeing these things?"
"I doubt it.  Everyone has a different take, like—" his twitching face conveyed Dare I say it? "—Rorschach blots."
"I was expecting hallucinations in the field," I admitted, "but up here?"
"TMS effects—" Szpindel snapped his fingers— "they're sticky, eh?  Neurons get kicked into one state, take a while to come unstuck.  You never got a TAT?  Well-adjusted boy like you?"
"Once or twice," I said.  "Maybe."
"Same principle."
"So I'm going to keep seeing this stuff."
"Party line is they fade over time.  Week or two you're back to normal.  But out here, with that thing..."  He shrugged.  "Too many variables.  Not the least of which is, I assume we'll keep going back until Sarasti says otherwise."
"But they're basically magnetic effects."
"Probably.  Although I'm not betting on anything where that fucker's concerned."
"Could something else be causing them?" I asked.  "Something on this ship?"
"Like what?'
"I don't know.  Leakage in Theseus' magnetic shielding, maybe."
"Not normally.  Course, we've all got little implanted networks in our heads, eh?  And you've got a whole hemisphere of prosthetics up there, who knows what kind of side-effects those might let you in for.  Why?  Rorschach not a good enough reason for you?"
I saw them before, I might have said.
And then Szpindel would say Oh, when? Where?
And maybe I'd reply When I was spying on your private life, and any chance of noninvasive observation would be flushed down to the atoms.
"It's probably nothing.   I've just been—jumpy lately.  Thought I saw something weird in the spinal bundle, back before we landed on Rorschach.  Just for a second, you know, and it disappeared as soon as I focused on it."
"Multijointed arms with a central mass?"
"God no.  Just a flicker, really.  If it was anything at all, it was probably just Amanda's rubber ball floating around up there."
"Probably."  Szpindel seemed almost amused.  "Couldn't hurt to check for leakage in the shielding, though.  Just in case.  Not like we need something else making us see things, eh?"
I shook my head at remembered nightmares.  "How are the others?"
"Gang's fine, if a bit disappointed.  Haven't seen the Major."  He shrugged.  "Maybe she's avoiding me."
"It hit her pretty hard."
"No worse than the rest of us, really.  She might not even remember it."
"How—how could she possibly believe she didn't even exist?"
Szpindel shook his head.  "Didn't believe it.  Knew it.  For a fact."
"But how—"
"Charge gauge on your car, right?  Sometimes the contacts corrode.   Readout freezes on empty, so you think it's empty.  What else you supposed to think?  Not like you can go in and count the electrons."
"You're saying the brain's got some kind of existence gauge?"
"Brain's got all kinds of gauges.  You can know you're blind even when you're not; you can know you can see, even when you're blind.  And yeah, you can know you don't exist even when you do.  It's a long list, commissar.  Cotard's,  Anton's, Damascus Disease.  Just for starters."
He hadn't said blindsight.
"What was it like?" I asked.
"Like?" Although he knew exactly what I meant.
"Did your arm— move by itself?  When it reached for that battery?"
"Oh.  Nah.  You're still in control, you just—you get a feeling, is all.  A sense of where to reach.  One part of the brain playing charades with another, eh?"  He gestured at the couch.  "Get off.  Seen enough of your ugly guts for now.  And send up Bates if you can find where she's hiding.  Probably back at Fab building a bigger army."
The misgivings glinted off him like sunlight.  "You have a problem with her," I said.
He started to deny it, then remembered who he was talking to.  "Not personally.  Just—human node running mechanical infantry.  Electronic reflexes slaved to meat reflexes. You tell me where the weak spot is."
"Down in Rorschach, I'd have to say all the links are pretty weak."
"Not talking about Rorschach," Szpindel said.  "We go there.  What stops them from coming here?"
"Them."
"Maybe they haven't arrived yet," he admitted.  "But when they do, I'm betting we'll be going up against something bigger than anaerobic microbes."  When I didn't answer he continued, his voice lowered.  "And anyway, Mission Control didn't know shit about Rorschach.  They thought they were sending us some place where drones could do all the heavy lifting.  But they just hate not being in command, eh?  Can't admit the grunts're smarter than the generals.  So our defenses get compromised for political appearances—not like that's any kinda news—and I'm no jarhead but it strikes me as real bad strategy."
I remembered Amanda Bates, midwifing the birth of her troops.  I'm more of a safety precaution....
"Amanda—" I began.
"Like Mandy fine.  Nice mammal.  But if we're cruising into a combat situation I don't want my ass covered by some network held back by its weakest link." 
"If you're going to be surrounded by a swarm of killer robots, maybe—"
"Yeah, people keep saying that.  Can't trust the machines.  Luddites love to go on about computer malfunctions, and how many accidental wars we might have prevented because a human had the final say.  But funny thing, commissar; nobody talks about how many intentional wars got started for the same reason.  You're still writing those postcards to posterity?"
I nodded, and didn't wince inwardly.  It was just Szpindel.
"Well, feel free to stick this conversation in your next one.  For all the good it'll do."

*

Imagine you are a prisoner of war.
You've got to admit you saw it coming.  You've been crashing tech and seeding biosols for a solid eighteen months; that's a good run by anyone's standards. Realist saboteurs do not, as a rule, enjoy long careers.  Everyone gets caught eventually.
It wasn't always thus.  There was a day you might have even hoped for a peaceful retirement.  But then they brought the vampires back from the Pleistocene and Great Grieving Ganga did that ever turn the balance of power upside down.  Those fuckers are always ten steps ahead.  It only makes sense; after all, hunting people is what bloodsuckers evolved to do.
There's this line from an early pop-dyn textbook, really old, maybe even TwenCen. It's something of a mantra—maybe prayer would be a better word—among those in your profession.  Predators run for their dinner, it goes.  Prey run for their lives.  The moral is supposed to be that on average, the hunted escape the hunters because they're more motivated.    
Maybe that was true when it all just came down to who ran faster.  Doesn't seem to hold when the strategy involves tactical foresight and double-reverse mind fucks, though.  The vampires win every time.
And now you're caught, and while it may have been vampires that set the trap, it was regular turncoat baseline humans who pulled the trigger.  For six hours now you've been geckoed to the wall of some unnamed unlisted underground detention facility, watching as some of those selfsame humans played games with your boyfriend and co-conspirator.  These are not your average games.  They involve pliers, and glowing wires, and body parts that were not designed to detach.  You wish, by now, that your lover were dead, like the two others in your cell whose parts are scattered  about the room.  But they're not letting that happen.  They're having too much fun.
That's what it all comes down to.  This is not an interrogation; there are less invasive ways to get more reliable answers.  These are simply a few more sadistic thugs with Authority, killing time and other things, and you can only cry and squeeze your eyes tight and whimper like an animal even though they haven't laid a hand on you yet.  You can only wish they hadn't saved you for last, because you know what that means.
But suddenly your tormentors stop in mid-game and cock their heads as if listening to some collective inner voice.  Presumably it tells them to take you off the wall, bring you into the next room, and sit you down at one of two gel-padded chairs on opposite sides of a smart desk, because this is what they do—far more gently than you'd expect—before retiring.  You can also assume that whoever has given these instructions is both powerful and displeased, because all the arrogant sadistic cockiness has drained from their faces in the space of a heartbeat.
You sit and wait.  The table glows with soft, cryptic symbols that would be of no earthly interest to you even if you could understand them, even if they contained the very secret of the vampires themselves.  Some small part of you wonders if this latest development might be cause for hope; the rest of you doesn't dare believe it.  You hate yourself for caring about your own survival when chunks of your friends and allies are still warm on the other side of the wall.
A stocky Amerind woman appears in the room with you, clad in nondescript military weave.  Her hair is buzzed short, her throat veined with the faint mesh of a sub-q antennae.  Your brain stem sees that she is ten meters tall, even though some impertinent gelatinous overlay insists that she is of only average height.
The name tag on her left breast says Bates.  You see no sign of rank.
Bates extracts a weapon from its sheath on her thigh.  You flinch, but she does not point it at you.  She sets it on the desk, easily within your reach, and sits across from you.
A microwave pistol.  Fully charged, unlocked.  On its lowest setting it causes sunburn and nausea.  On its highest it flash-boils brains in the skull.  At any setting between, it inflicts pain and injury in increments as fine as your imagination.
Your imagination has been retooled for great sensitivity along such scales.  You stare numbly at the gun, trying to figure the trick. 
"Two of your friends are dead," Bates says, as though you haven't just watched them die. "Irrecoverably so."
Irrecoverably dead.  Good one.
"We could reconstitute the bodies, but the brain damage..."  Bates clears her throat as if uncomfortable, as if embarrassed. It's a surprisingly human gesture for a monster.  "We're trying to save the other one.  No promises.
"We need information," she says, cutting to the chase.
Of course.  What came before was psychology, softening-up.  Bates is the good cop.
"I've got nothing to tell you," you manage.  It's ten percent defiance, ninety percent deduction: they wouldn't have been able to catch you in the first place unless they already knew everything.
"Then we need an arrangement," Bates says.  "We need to come to some kind of accommodation."
She has to be kidding.
Your incredulity must be showing.  Bates addresses it:  "I'm not completely unsympathetic.  My gut doesn't much like the idea of swapping reality for simulation, and it doesn't buy that what-is-truth spin the Body Economic sells to get around it.  Maybe there's reason to be scared.  Not my problem, not my job, just my opinion and it could be wrong.  But if we kill each other in the meantime, we don't find out either way.  It's unproductive."
You see the dismembered bodies of your friends.  You see pieces on the floor, still a little bit alive, and this cunt has the nerve to talk about productivity?
"We didn't start it," you say.
"I don't know and I don't care.  Like I said, it's not my job."  Bates jerks a thumb over her shoulder at a door in the wall behind her, the door she must have entered through.  "In there," she says, "are the ones who killed your friends.  They've been disarmed.  When you go through that door the room will go offline and remain unmonitored for a period of sixty seconds.  Nobody besides yourself will ever hold you accountable for whatever happens in there during that time."
It's a trick.  It has to be.
"What do you have to lose?" Bates wonders.  "We can already do anything we want to you.  It's not like we need you to give us an excuse."
Hesitantly, you take the gun.  Bates doesn't stop you.
She's right, you realize.  You have absolutely nothing to lose. You stand and, suddenly fearless, point the weapon at her face.  "Why go in there?  I can kill you right here."
She shrugs.  "You could try.  Waste of an opportunity, if you ask me."
"So I go in there, and I come out in sixty seconds, and then what?"
"Then we talk."
"We just—"
"Think of it as a gesture of good faith," she says.  "Restitution, even." 
The door opens at your approach, closes in your wake.  And there they are, all four of them, spread up across the wall like a chorus line of Christs on crosses.  There's no gleam in those eyes now.  There's only a bright animal terror and the reflection of turned tables.  Two of the Christs stain their pants when you look them in the eye.
What's left?  Maybe fifty seconds?
It's not a lot.  You could have done so much more with just a little extra time.  But it's enough, and you don't want to impose on the good graces of this Bates woman.
Because she may at last be someone you can deal with.

*

Under other circumstances, Lieutenant Amanda Bates would have been court-martialed and executed within the month.  No matter that the four who'd died had been guilty of multiple counts of rape, torture, and homicide; that's just what people did in wartime.  It's what they'd always done.  There was nothing polite about war, no honorable code beyond the chain of command and the circling of wagons.  Deal with indiscretions if you must; punish the guilty if you have to, for appearance if nothing else.  But for God's sake close the doors first.  Never give your enemy the satisfaction of seeing discord in the ranks, show them nothing but unity and flinty-eyed resolve.  There may be murderers and rapists in our midst, but by God they're our murderers and rapists.
You certainly don't give right of revenge to some terrorist twat with over a hundred friendly scalps on her belt.
Still, it was hard to argue with results:  a negotiated ceasefire with the third-largest Realist franchise in the hemisphere.  An immediate forty-six percent decline in terrorist activities throughout the affected territories.  The unconditional cancellation of several in-progress campaigns which could have seriously compromised three major catacombs and taken out the Duluth Staging Grounds entirely.  All because Lieutenant Amanda Bates, feeling her way through her first field command, had gambled on empathy as a military strategy.
It was collaborating with the enemy, it was treason, it was betrayal of the rank and file.  Diplomats and politicians were supposed to do those things, not soldiers.
Still.  Results.
It was all there in the record: initiative, creativity, a willingness to succeed by whatever means necessary and at whatever cost.  Perhaps those inclinations needed to be punished, perhaps only tempered.  The debate might have gone on forever if the story hadn't leaked—but it had, and suddenly the generals had a hero on their hands.
Sometime during her court-martial, Bates's death sentence turned into a rehabilitation; the only question was whether it would take place in the stockade or Officer's College.  As it turned out, Leavenworth had both; it took her to its bosom and squeezed hard enough to virtually guarantee promotion, if it didn't kill her first.  Three years later Major Bates was bound for the stars, where she was heard to say
We're breaking and entering, Siri...
Szpindel was not the first to register doubts.  Others had wondered whether her assignment owed as much to superior qualifications as it did to the resolution of inconvenient PR.  I, of course, had no opinion one way or the other; but I could see how she might strike some as a double-edged sword.
When the fate of the world hangs in the balance, you want to keep an eye on anyone whose career-defining moment involves consorting with the enemy.
"If you can see it, chances are it doesn't exist."
—Kate Keogh, Grounds for Suicide

Five times we did it.  Over five consecutive orbits we threw ourselves between the monster's jaws, let it chew at us with a trillion microscopic teeth until Theseus reeled us in and stitched us back together.  We crept through Rorschach's belly in fits and starts, focusing as best we could on the tasks at hand, trying to ignore the ghosts that tickled our midbrains.  Sometimes the walls flexed subtly around us.  Sometimes we only thought they did.  Sometimes we took refuge in our diving bell while waves of charge and magnetism spiraled languidly past, like boluses of ectoplasm coursing down the intestine of some poltergeist god.
  Sometimes we got caught in the open.  The Gang would squabble amongst itself, uncertain which persona was which.  Once I fell into a kind of waking paralysis while alien hands dragged me away down the hall; fortunately other hands brought me home, and voices that claimed to be real told me I'd made the whole thing up.  Twice Amanda Bates found God,  saw the fucker right there in front of her, knew beyond any shadow of a doubt that the creator not only existed but spoke to her, and her alone.  Both times she lost her faith once we got her into the bell, but it was touch and go for a while; her warrior drones, drunk on power but still under line-of-sight control, staggered from their perimeters and pointed their weapons along bearings too close for comfort.
The grunts died fast.  Some barely lasted a single foray; a few died in minutes.  The longest-lived were the slowest on the draw, half-blind, thick-witted, every command and response bottlenecked by raw high-frequency sound buzzing across their shielded eardrums.  Sometimes we backed them up with others that spoke optically:  faster but nervous, and even more vulnerable.  Together they guarded against an opposition that had not yet shown its face.
It hardly had to.  Our troops fell even in the absence of enemy fire.
We worked through it all, through fits and hallucinations and occasional convulsions.  We tried to watch each others' backs while magnetic tendrils tugged our inner ears and made us seasick.  Sometimes we vomited into our helmets; then we'd just hang on, white-faced, sucking sour air through clenched teeth while the recyclers filtered chunks and blobs from our headspace.  And we'd give silent thanks for the small mercy of nonstick, static-repellent faceplates.
It rapidly became obvious that my presence served as more than cannon fodder.  It didn't matter that I lacked the Gang's linguistic skills or Szpindel's expertise in biology; I was another set of hands, in a place where anyone could be laid out at a moment's notice.  The more people Sarasti kept in the field, the greater the odds that at least one of them would be halfway functional at any given moment.  Even so, we were in barely any condition to accomplish anything.  Every incursion was an exercise in reckless endangerment.  
We did it anyway.  It was that or go home.
The work proceeded in infinitesimal increments, hamstrung on every front.  The Gang wasn't finding any evidence of signage or speech to decipher, but the gross mechanics of this thing were easy enough to observe.  Sometimes Rorschach partitioned itself, extruded ridges around its passageways like the cartilaginous hoops encircling a human trachea.  Over hours some of them might develop into a contracting irises, into complete septa, lazy as warm candle wax.  We seemed to be witnessing the growth of the structure in discrete segments.  Rorschach grew mainly from the tips of its thorns; we'd made our incursion hundreds of meters from the nearest, but evidently the process extended at least this far back.
If it was part of the normal growth process, though, it was a feeble echo of what must have been going on in the heart of the apical zones.  We couldn't observe those directly, not from inside; barely a hundred meters towards the thorn the tube grew too lethal even for suicidal flesh.  But over those five orbits Rorschach grew by another eight percent, as mindless and mechanical as a growing crystal.
Through it all I tried to do my job.  I compiled and collated, massaged data I would never understand.  I watched the systems around me as best I could, factored each tic and trait into the mix.  One part of my mind produced synopses and syntheses while another watched, incredulous and uncomprehending.  Neither part could trace where those insights had come from.
It was difficult, though.  Sarasti wouldn't let me back outside the system.  Every observation was contaminated by my own confounding presence in the mix.  I did my best.  I made no suggestions that might affect critical decisions.  In the field I did what I was told to, and no more.  I tried to be like one of Bates's drones, a simple tool with no initiative and no influence on the group dynamic.  I think I pulled it off, for the most part.
My nonsights accumulated on schedule and piled up in Theseus's transmission stack, unsent.  There was too much local interference to get a signal through to Earth. 

*

Szpindel was right:  the ghosts followed us back.  We began to hear voices other than Sarasti's, whispering up the spine.  Sometimes even the brightly-lit wraparound world of the drum would warp and jiggle from the corner of my eye—and more than once I saw boney headless phantoms with too many arms, nested in the scaffolding.  They seemed solid enough from the corner of my eye but any spot I focused on faded to shadow, to a dark translucent stain against the background.  They were so very fragile, these ghosts.  The mere act of observation drilled holes through them.
Szpindel had rattled off dementias like raindrops.  I went to ConSensus for enlightenment and found a whole other self buried below the limbic system, below the hindbrain, below even the cerebellum.  It lived in the brain stem and it was older than the vertebrates themselves.   It was self-contained:  it heard and saw and felt, independent of all those other parts layered overtop like evolutionary afterthoughts.  It dwelt on nothing but its own survival.  It had no time for planning or abstract analysis, spared effort for only the most rudimentary sensory processing.  But it was fast, and it was dedicated, and it could react to threats in a fraction of the time it took its smarter roommates to even become aware of them.
And even when it couldn't—when the obstinate, unyielding neocortex refused to let it off the leash—still it tried to pass on what it saw, and Isaac Szpindel experienced an ineffable sense of where to reach.  In a way, he had a stripped-down version of the Gang in his head.  Everyone did.
I looked further and found God Itself in the meat of the brain, found the static that had sent Bates into rapture and Michelle into convulsions.  I tracked Gray Syndrome to its headwaters in the temporal lobe.  I heard voices ranting in the brains of schizophrenics.  I found cortical infarcts that inspired people to reject their own limbs, imagined the magnetic fields that must have acted in their stead when Cruncher tried to dismember himself.    And off in some half-forgotten pesthole of Twentieth-century case studies—filed under Cotard's Syndrome—I found Amanda Bates and others of her kind, their brains torqued into denial of the very self.  "I used to have a heart," one of them said listlessly from the archives.  "Now I have something that beats in its place."  Another demanded to be buried, because his corpse was already stinking.
There was more, a whole catalog of finely-tuned dysfunctions that Rorschach had not yet inflicted on us.  Somnambulism.  Agnosias.   Hemineglect.   ConSensus served up a freak show to make any mind reel at its own fragility:  a woman dying of thirst within easy reach of water, not because she couldn't see the faucet but because she couldn't recognize it.  A man for whom the left side of the universe did not exist, who could neither perceive nor conceive of the left side of his body, of a room, of a line of text.  A man for whom the very concept of leftness had become literally unthinkable.
Sometimes we could conceive of things and still not see them, although they stood right before us.  Skyscrapers appeared out of thin air, the person talking to us changed into someone else during a momentary distraction— and we didn't notice.  It wasn't magic.  It was barely even misdirection.  They called it inattentional blindness, and it had been well-known for a century or more:  a tendency for the eye to simply not notice things that evolutionary experience classed as unlikely.
I found the opposite of Szpindel's blindsight, a malady not in which the sighted believe they are blind but one in which the blind insist they can see.   The very idea was absurd unto insanity and yet there they were, retinas detached, optic nerves burned away, any possibility of vision denied by the laws of physics:  bumping into walls, tripping over furniture, inventing endless ludicrous explanations for their clumsiness.  The lights, unexpectedly turned off by some other party.  A colorful bird glimpsed through the window, distracting attention from the obstacle ahead.  I can see perfectly well, thank you.  Nothing wrong with my eyes.
Gauges in the head, Szpindel had called them.  But there were other things in there too.  There was a model of the world, and we didn't look outward at all; our conscious selves saw only the simulation in our heads, an interpretation of reality, endlessly refreshed by input from the senses.  What happens when those senses go dark, but the model—thrown off-kilter by some trauma or tumor—fails to refresh?  How long do we stare in at that obsolete rendering, recycling and massaging the same old data in a desperate, subconscious act of utterly honest denial?  How long before it dawns on us that the world we see no longer reflects the world we inhabit, that we are blind?
Months sometimes, according to the case files.  For one poor woman, a year and more.
Appeals to logic fail utterly.  How could you see the bird when there is no window?  How do you decide where your seen half-world ends if you can't see the other half to weigh it against?  If you are dead, how can you smell your own corruption?  If you do not exist, Amanda, what is talking to us now?
Useless.  When you're in the grip of Cotard's Syndrome or hemineglect you cannot be swayed by argument.  When you're in thrall to some alien artefact you know that the self is gone, that reality ends at the midline.  You know it with the same unshakeable certainty of any man regarding the location of his own limbs, with that hardwired awareness that needs no other confirmation.  Against that conviction, what is reason?  What is logic?
Inside Rorschach, they had no place at all.

*

On the sixth orbit it acted.
"It's talking to us," James said.  Her eyes were wide behind the faceplate, but not bright, not manic.  Around us Rorschach's guts oozed and crawled at the corner of my eye; it still took effort to ignore the illusion.  Foreign words scrabbled like small animals below my brainstem as I tried to focus on a ring of finger-sized protrusions that picketed a patch of wall.
"It's not talking," Szpindel said from across the artery.  "You're hallucinating again."
Bates said nothing.  Two grunts hovered in the middle of the space, panning across three axes.
"It's different this time," James insisted.  "The geometry—it's not so symmetrical.  Looks almost like the Phaistos disk."  She spun slowly, pointed down the passage:  "I think it's stronger down here…" 
"Bring Michelle out," Szpindel suggested.  "Maybe she can talk some sense into you."
James laughed weakly. "Never say die, do you?"  She tweaked her pistol and coasted into deeper gloom.  "Yes, it's definitely stronger here.  There's content, superimposed on—"
Quick as a blink, Rorschach cut her off.
I'd never seen anything move so fast before.  There was none of the languor we'd grown accustomed to from Rorschach's septa, no lazy drift to contraction; the iris snapped shut in an instant.  Suddenly the artery just ended three meters ahead, with a matte-black membrane filigreed in fine spiral.
And the Gang of Four was on the other side.
The grunts were on it immediately, lasers crackling through the air.  Bates was yelling Get behind me!  Stick to the walls!, kicking herself into space like an acrobat in fast-forward, taking some tactical high ground that must have been obvious to her, at least.  I edged towards the perimeter.  Threads of superheated plasma sliced the air, shimmering.  Szpindel, at the corner of my eye, hugged the opposite side of the tunnel.  The walls crawled.  I could see the lasers taking a toll; the septum peeled back from their touch like burning paper, black oily smoke writhing from its crisping edges and—
Sudden brightness, everywhere.  A riot of fractured light flooded the artery, a thousand shifting angles of incidence and reflection.  It was like being trapped in the belly of a kaleidoscope, pointed at the sun.  Light—
—and needle-sharp pain in my side, in my left arm.  The smell of charred meat.  A scream, cut off.
Susan?  You there, Susan?  
We're taking you first.
Around me, the light died; inside me, a swarm of floaters mixed it up with the chronic half-visions Rorschach had already planted in my head.  Alarms chirped irritatingly in my helmet—  breach, breach, breach—until the smart fabric of the suit softened and congealed where the holes had been.  Something stung maddeningly in my left side.  I felt as if I'd been branded.
"Keeton!  Check Szpindel!"  Bates had called off the lasers.  The grunts closed for hand-to-hand, reaching with fiery nozzles and diamond-tipped claws to grapple with some prismatic material glowing softly behind that burnt-back skin.
Fibrous reflector, I realized.  It had shattered the laser light, turned it to luminous shrapnel and thrown it back in our faces.  Clever.
But its surface was still alight, even with the lasers down; a diffuse glow, dipping and weaving, filtered through from the far side of the barrier while the drones chewed doggedly through the near one.  After a moment it struck me:  James's headlamp.
"Keeton!"
Right.  Szpindel.
His faceplate was intact.  The laser had melted the Faraday mesh laminated onto the crystal, but the suit was sealing that tiny hole even now.  The hole behind, drilled neatly through his forehead, remained.  The eyes beneath stared at infinity.
"Well?" Bates asked.  She could read his vitals as easily as I, but Theseus was capable of post-mortem rebuilds.
Barring brain damage.  "No."
The whine of drills and shredders stopped; the ambience brightened.  I looked away from Szpindel's remains.  The grunts had cut a hole in the septum's fibrous underlayer.  One of them nosed its way through to the other side.
A new sound rose into the mix, a soft animal keening, haunted and dissonant.  For a moment I thought Rorschach was whispering to us again;  its walls seemed to contract slightly around me.
"James?" Bates snapped.  "James!"
Not James.  A little girl in a woman's body in an armored spacesuit, scared out of her wits.
The grunt nudged her curled-up body back into our company.  Bates took it gently.  "Susan?  Come back, Suze.  You're safe."
The grunts hovered restlessly, alert in every direction, pretending everything was under control.  Bates spared me a glance—"Take Isaac."—and turned back to James. "Susan?"
"N—n-no," whimpered a small voice, a little girl's voice.
"Michelle?  Is that you?"
"There was a thing," the little girl said. "It grabbed me.  It grabbed my leg."
"We're out of here." Bates pulled the Gang back along the passage.  One grunt lingered, watching the hole; the other took point.  
"It's gone," Bates said gently.  "There's nothing there now.  See the feed?"
"You can't s-see it." Michelle whispered.  "It's in—it's in—visible.."
The septum receded around a curve as we retreated.  The hole torn through its center watched us like the ragged pupil of some great unblinking eye.  It stayed empty as long as it stayed in sight.  Nothing came out after us.  Nothing we could see.  A thought began cycling through my head, some half-assed eulogy stolen from an eavesdropped confessional, and try as I might I couldn't shut it down.  
Isaac Szpindel hadn't made the semifinals after all.

*

Susan James came back to us on the way up.  Isaac Szpindel did not.
We stripped wordlessly in the decon balloon.  Bates, first out of her suit, reached for Szpindel but the Gang stopped her with a hand and a headshake.  Personae segued one into another as they stripped the body.  Susan  removed helmet and backpack and breastplate.  Cruncher peeled away the silvery leaded skin from collar to toe.  Sascha stripped the jumpsuit and left the pale flesh naked and exposed.  Except for the gloves.  They left his feedback gloves in place; their fingertips forever tactile, the flesh inside forever numb.  Through it all, Szpindel stared unblinking beneath the hole in his forehead.  His glazed eyes focused on distant quasars.
I expected Michelle to appear in her turn and close them, but she never did.

"You have eyes, but you do not see"
—Jesus the Nazorean

I don't know how to feel about this, I thought.  He was a good man.  He was decent, he was kind to me, even when he didn't know I was listening in.  I didn't know him long— he wasn't a friend exactly— but still.  I should miss him.  I should mourn.
I should feel more than this sick sinking fear that I could be next...
Sarasti hadn't wasted any time.  Szpindel's replacement met us as we emerged, freshly thawed, nicotine-scented.  The rehydration of his flesh was ongoing— saline bladders clung to each thigh—although it would never entirely erase the sharpness of his features.  His bones cracked when he moved.
He looked past me and took the body.  "Susan—Michelle...I—"
The gang turned away.
He coughed, began fumbling a body condom over the corpse.  "Sarasti wants everyone in the drum."
"We're hot," Bates said.  Even cut short, the excursion had piled up a lethal Seivert count.  Faint nausea tickled the back of my throat.
"Decontaminate later." One long pull of a zipper and Szpindel was gone, engulfed in an oily gray shroud.  "You—" he turned in my direction, pointed at the scorched holes in my jumpsuit.   "With me."
Robert Cunningham.  Another prototype.  Dark-haired, hollow-cheeked, a jaw you could use as a ruler.  Both smoother and harsher than the man he had replaced.  Where Szpindel had ticced and jerked as if static-charged, Cunningham's face held all the expression of a wax dummy's.  The wetware that ran those muscles had been press-ganged into other pursuits.  Even the tremors that afflicted the rest of his body were muted, soothed by the nicotine he drew with every second breath. 
He held no cigarette now.  He held only the shrouded body of his hard-luck primary and his ongoing, freshly thawed distate for the ship's synthesist.  His fingers trembled.
Bates and the Gang moved silently up the spine.  Cunningham and I followed, guiding the Shroud of Szpindel between us.  My leg and side were stinging again, now that Cunningham had reminded them to.  There wouldn't be much he could do about them, though.  The beams would have cauterized the flesh on their way through, and if they'd hit anything vital I'd have been dead already.
At the hatch we broke into single-file:  Szpindel first, Cunningham pushing at his heels.  By the time I emerged into the drum Bates and the gang were already down on deck and taking their usual seats.  Sarasti, in the flesh, watched them from the end of the conference table.
His eyes were naked.  From this angle the soft, full-spectrum light of the drum washed the shine from them.  If you didn't look too closely, for too long, you might almost think those eyes were Human.
BioMed had been spun down for my arrival.  Cunningham pointed to a diagnostic couch on a section of the stilled deck that served as our infirmary; I floated over and strapped myself in.  Two meters away, past a waist-high guard rail that had risen from the deck, the rest of the drum rolled smoothly past.  It slung Bates and the Gang and Sarasti around like weights on a string.  
I tapped ConSensus to hear them.  James was speaking, quietly and without expression.  "I noticed a new pattern in the form-constants.  Something in the grating.  It looked like a signal.  It got stronger as I went down the tunnel, I followed it, I blacked out.  I don't remember anything more until we were on our way back.  Michelle filled me in, as much as she could.  That's all I know.  I'm sorry."
A hundred degrees away in the no-gee zone, Cunningham maneuvered his predecessor into a coffin with different options than those up front.  I wondered if it would embark on an autopsy during the debriefing.  I wondered if we'd be able to hear the sounds it made.
"Sascha," Sarasti said.
"Yeah."  Sascha's trademark drawl infected the voice.  "I was riding Mom.  Went deaf dumb and stark fucking blind when she passed out.  I tried to take over but something was blocking me.  Michelle, I guess.  Never thought she had it in her.  I couldn't even see."
"But you don't lose consciousness."
"I was awake the whole time, far as I know.  Just completely in the dark."
"Smell?  Tactile?"
"I could feel it when Michelle pissed in the suit.  But I didn't notice anything else."
Cunningham was back at my side.  The inevitable cigarette had appeared between his lips.  
"Nothing touches you," the vampire surmised.  "Nothing grabs your leg."
"No,"  Sascha said.  She didn't believe Michelle's stories about invisible monsters.  None of us did; why bother, when dementia could so easily explain anything we experienced?
"Cruncher."
"Don't know anything,"  I still wasn't used to the maleness of the voice now emanating from James's throat.  Cruncher was a workaholic.  He hardly ever surfaced in mixed company. 
"You're there," Sarasti reminded him.  "You must remember some—"
"Mom sent me patterns to parse.  I was working on them.  I'm still working on them," he added pointedly.  "I didn't notice anything.  Is that all?"
 I'd never been able to get a good read on him.  Sometimes Cruncher seemed to have more in common with the dozens of nonconscious modules working in James's head than with sentient hubs comprising the rest of the Gang.  "You feel nothing?"  Sarasti pressed.
"Just the patterns."
"Anything significant?"
"Standard phenomath spirals and gratings.  But I haven't finished.  Can I go now?"
"Yes.  Call Michelle, please."
Cunningham stabbed at my wounds with anabolisers, muttering to himself.  Faint blue smoke curled between us.  "Isaac found some tumors," he observed.
I nodded and coughed.  My throat was sore.  The nausea had grown heavy enough to sink below my diaphragm.
"Michelle." Sarasti repeated.
"I see some more here," Cunningham continued.  "Along the bottom of your brain pan.  Only a few dozen cells so far, they're not worth burning yet."
"Here."  Michelle's voice was barely audible, even through ConSensus, but at least it was the voice of an adult.  "I'm here."
"What do you remember, please?"
"I—I felt—I was just riding Mom, and then she was gone and there was no one else, so I had to—take over…"
"Do you see the septum close?"
"Not really.  I felt it going dark, but when I turned around we were already trapped.  And then I felt something behind me, it wasn't loud or harsh it just sort of bumped, and it grabbed me, and—and—
"I'm sorry," she said after a moment.  "I'm a bit—woozy..."
Sarasti waited.
"Isaac," Michelle whispered.  "He..."
"Yes."  A pause.  "We're very sorry about that."    
"Maybe—can he be fixed?"
"No.  There's brain damage."  There was something like sympathy in the vampire's voice, the practiced affectation of an accomplished mimic.  There was something else, too, an all-but-imperceptible hunger, a subtle edge of temptation.  I don't think anyone heard it but me.
We were sick, and getting sicker.  Predators are drawn to the weak and injured.
Michelle had fallen silent again.  When she continued, her voice only faltered a little:  "I can't tell you much.  It grabbed me.  It let me go.  I went to pieces, and I can't explain why except that fucking place just does things to you, and I was—weak.  I'm sorry.  There's not much else to tell you."
"Thank you,"  Sarasti said after a long moment.
"Can I—I'd like to leave if that's okay."
"Yes," Sarasti said.  Michelle sank below the surface as the Commons rotated past.  I didn't see who took her place.
"The grunts didn't see anything," Bates remarked.  "By the time we broke through the septum the tunnel behind was empty."
"Any bogey would have had plenty of time to hightail," Cunningham said.  He planted his feet on the deck and grabbed a handhold; the subdrum began to move.  I drifted obliquely against my restraints.  
"I don't disagree," Bates said, "But if there's anything we've learned about that place, it's that we can't trust our senses."
"Trust Michelle's," Sarasti said.  He opened a window as I grew heavier:  a grunt's-eye view of a fuzzy, bright blob weaving behind the translucent waxed-paper fibers of the skinned septum.  James's headlight, from the wrong side of the barrier.  The image wobbled a bit as the drone staggered through some local pocket of magnetism, then replayed.  Wobbled, replayed.  A six-second loop.
"See something next to the Gang."
Non-vampires saw no such thing.  Sarasti froze the image, evidently realizing as much.  "Diffraction patterns aren't consistent with a single light source in open space.  I see dimmer elements, reflective elements.  Two dark objects close together, similar size,  scattering light  here—" a cursor appeared at two utterly nondescript points on the image— "and here.  One's the Gang.  The other's unaccounted for."
"Just a minute," Cunningham said.  "If you can see it through all that, why didn't Su—why didn't Michelle see anything?"
"Synesthesiac," Sarasti reminded him.  "You see.  She feels."
BioMed jerked slightly, locking  into spin-synch with the drum; the guard rail sank back into the deck.  Off in some far-off corner, something without eyes watched me watching it.
"Shit," Bates whispered.  "There's someone home."

*

They never really talked like that, by the way.  You'd hear gibberish—a half-dozen languages,  a whole Babel of personal idioms—if I spoke in their real voices.
Some of the simpler tics make it through:  Sascha's good-natured belligerence, Sarasti's aversion to the past tense.  Cunningham lost most of his gender pronouns to an unforeseen glitch during the work on his temporal lobe.  But it went beyond that.  The whole lot of them threw English and Hindi and Hadzane into every second sentence; no real scientist would allow their thoughts to be hamstrung by the conceptual limitations of a single language.  Other times they acted almost as synthesists in their own right, conversing in grunts and gestures that would be meaningless to any baseline.  It's not so much that the bleeding edge lacks social skills; it's just that once you get past a certain point, formal speech is too damn slow. 
Except for Susan James.   The walking contradiction, the woman so devoted to Communication As Unifier that she'd cut her own brain into disunified chunks to make the point.  She was the only one who ever seemed to care who she was talking to.  The others spoke only for themselves, even when they spoke to each other.  Even James's other cores would speak their own minds in their own way, and let everyone else translate as best they could.  It wasn't a problem.  Everyone on Theseus could read everyone else.
But that didn't matter to Susan James.  She fit each of her words to their intended recipient, she accommodated.
I am a conduit.  I exist to bridge the gap, and I'd bridge nothing if I only told you what these people said.  So I am telling you what they meant, and it will mean as much to you as you can handle.
Except for Susan James, linguist and Ringleader, whom I trust to speak for herself.

*

Fifteen minutes to apogee:  maximum safe distance, in case Rorschach decided to hit back.  Far below,  the artefact's magnetic field pressed into Ben's atmosphere like God's little finger. Great dark thunderheads converged behind it; turbulent moon-sized curlicues collided in its wake.
Fifteen minutes to apogee, and Bates was still hoping Sarasti would change his mind.
In a way, this was her fault.  If she had just treated this new travail as one more cross to bear, perhaps things would have gone on more or less as before.  There would have been some faint hope that Sarasti would have let us grit our teeth and keep on going, besieged now by spring-loaded trapdoors as well as the usual gauntlet of Seiverts and magnets and monsters from the id.  But Bates had made an issue out of it.  It wasn't just another piece of shit in the sewer to her: it was the one that clogged the pipe.
We're on the brink as it is, just surviving the baseline environment of this thing.  If it's started taking deliberate countermeasures…I don't see how we can risk it.
Fourteen minutes to apogee, and Amanda Bates was still regretting those words.
On previous expeditions we'd charted twenty-six septa in various stages of development.  We'd x-rayed them.  We'd done ultrasound.  We'd watched them ooze their way across passages or ebb slowly back into the walls.  The iris that had snapped shut behind the Gang of Four had been a whole different animal.
And what are the odds that the first one with a hair-trigger just happened to also come with antilaser prismatics? That was no routine growth event.  That thing was set for us.
Set by…
That was the other thing.  Thirteen minutes to apogee, and Bates was worried about the tenants.
It had always been breaking and entering, of course.  That much hadn't changed.  But when we'd jimmied the lock we'd thought we were vandalizing an empty summer cottage, still under construction.  We'd thought the owners would be out of the picture for a while.  We hadn't been expecting one of them to catch us on his way to take a late-night piss.  And now that one had, and vanished into the labyrinth, it was natural to wonder what weapons it might keep stashed under the pillow…
Those septa could spring on us any time.  How many are there?  Are they fixed, or portable?  We can't proceed without knowing these things..
At first, Bates had been surprised and delighted when Sarasti agreed with her.
Twelve minutes to apogee.  From this high ground, well above the static, Theseus peered down through Rorschach's wrenched and twisted anatomy to keep rock-steady eyes on the tiny wound we'd burned in its side.  Our limpet tent covered it like a blister; inside, Jack fed us a second, first-person view of the unfolding experiment.
Sir.  We know Rorschach is inhabited.  Do we want to risk further provoking the inhabitants?  Do we want to risk killing them?
Sarasti hadn't quite looked at her, and hadn't quite spoken.  If he had, he might have said I do not understand how meat like you survived to adulthood.
Eleven minutes to apogee, and Amanda Bates was lamenting the fact—not for the first time— that this mission was not under military jurisdiction.
We were waiting for maximum distance before performing the experiment.  Rorschach might interpret this as a hostile act, Sarasti had conceded in a voice that contained no trace of irony whatsoever.  Now he stood before us, watching ConSensus play on the table.  Reflections writhed across his naked eyes, not quite masking the deeper reflections behind them.
Ten minutes to apogee.  Susan James was wishing that Cunningham would put out that goddamned cigarrette.  The smoke stank on its way to the ventilators, and anyway, it wasn't necessary. It was just an anachronistic affectation, an attention-getting device; if he needed the nicotine a patch could have soothed his tremors just as easily, without the moke and the stink.
That wasn't all she was thinking, though.  She was wondering why Cunningham had been summoned to Sarasti's quarters earlier in the shift, why he'd looked at her so strangely afterward.  I wondered about that myself.  A quick check on ConSensus timestamps showed that her medical file had been accessed during that period.  I checked those stats, let the shapes bounce between hemispheres: part of my brain locked on elevated oxytocin as the probable reason for that conference.  There was an eighty-two percent chance that James had become too trusting for Sarasti's liking.
I had no idea how I knew that.  I never did.
Nine minutes to apogee
Barely a molecule of Rorschach's atmosphere had been lost on our account.  That was all about to change.  Our view of  base camp split like a dividing bacterium:  one window now focused on the limpet tent, the other on a wide-angle tactical enhance of the space around it.
Eight minutes to apogee.  Sarasti pulled the plug.
Down on Rorschach, our tent burst like a bug beneath a boot.  A geyser erupted from the wound; a snowstorm swirled at its edges, its charged curlicues intricate as lace.  Atmosphere gushed into vacuum, spread thin, crystallized.  Briefly, the space around base camp sparkled.  It was almost beautiful.
Bates didn't think it was beautiful at all.  She watched that bleeding wound with a face as expressionless as Cunningham's, but her jaw was clenched unto tetanus.  Her eyes darted between views:  watching for things gasping in the shadows. 
Rorschach convulsed.
Vast trunks and arteries shuddered, a seismic tremor radiating out along the structure.  The epicenter began to twist, a vast segment rotating on its axis, the breach midway along its length.  Stress lines appeared where the length that rotated sheared against the lengths to either side that didn't; the structure seemed to soften and stretch there, constricting like a great elongate balloon torqueing itself into sausage links.
Sarasti clicked.  Cats made something like that sound when they spied a bird on the far side of a windowpane.
ConSensus groaned with the sound of worlds scraping against each other: telemetry from the onsite sensors, their ears to the ground.  Jack's camera controls had frozen again.  The image it sent was canted and grainy.    The pickup stared blankly at the edge of the hole we'd bored into the underworld. 
The groaning subsided.  A final faint cloud of crystalline stardust dissipated into space, barely visible even on max enhance.
No bodies.  None visible, anyway.
Sudden motion at base camp.  At first I thought it was static on Jack's feed, playing along lines of high contrast—but no, something was definitely moving along the edges of the hole we'd burned.  Something almost wriggled there, a thousand gray mycelia extruding from the cut surface and writhing slowly into the darkness.  "It's—huh," Bates said.  "Triggered by the pressure drop, I guess.  That's one way to seal a breach."
Two weeks after we'd wounded it, Rorschach had begun to heal itself.
Apogee behind us now.  All downhill from here.  Theseus began the long drop back into enemy territory.
"Doesn't use septa," Sarasti said.
"Some parts of the mind register the attainment of increments of fitness by giving us a sensation of pleasure.  Other parts use a knowledge of cause and effect to bring about goals.  Put them together and you get a mind that rises to a biologically pointless challenge: figuring out how to get at the pleasure circuits of the brain ... without the inconvenience of wringing bona fide fitness increments from the harsh world."
—Steven Pinker, How the Mind Works

First-person sex—real sex, as Chelsea insisted on calling it—was an acquired taste:  jagged breathing, the raw slap and stink of sweaty skin full of pores and blemishes, a whole other person with a whole other set of demands and dislikes.  There was definite animal appeal, no doubt about it.  This was, after all, how we'd done it for millions of years.  But this, this third-world carnality had always carried an element of struggle, of asynchronous patterns in conflict.  There was no convergence here.  There was only the rhythm of bodies in collision, a struggle for dominance, each trying to force the other into synch.  
Chelsea regarded it as love in its purest form.  I came to think of it as hand-to-hand combat.  Before, whether fucking creations from my own menu or slip-on skins from someone else's,  I had always selected the contrast and the rez, the texture and the attitude.  The bodily functions, the resistance of competing desires, the endless foreplay that wears your tongue to the root and leaves your face sticky and glistening—just kinks, today.  Options for the masochistic.
But there were no options with Chelsea.  With her, everything came standard.
I indulged her.  I guess I was no more patient with her perversions than she was with my ineptitude at them.  Other things made it worth the effort.  Chelsea would argue about anything under the sun, wry and insightful and curious as a cat.  She would pounce without warning.  Retired to the redundant majority, she still took such simple joy in the very act of being alive.   She was impulsive and impetuous.  She cared about people.  Pag.  Me.  She wanted to know me.  She wanted in. 
That was proving to be a problem.
"We could try it again," she said once in an aftermath of sweat and pheromones.  "And you won't even remember what you were so upset about.  You won't even remember you were upset, if you don't want to."
 I smiled and looked away; suddenly the planes of her face were coarse and unappealing.  "How many times is that now?  Eight?  Nine?"
"I just want you to be happy, Cyg.  True happiness is one hell of a gift, and I can give it to you if you'll let me."
"You don't want me happy," I said pleasantly.  "You want me customized."
She mmm'd into the hollow of my throat for a moment.  Then: "What?"
"You just want to change me into something more, more accommodating."
Chelsea lifted her head.  "Look at me."
I turned my head.  She'd shut down the chromatophores in her cheek; the tattoo, transplanted, fluttered now on her shoulder.
"Look at my eyes," Chelsea said.
I looked at the imperfect skin around them, at the capillaries wriggling across the whites.  I felt a distant bemusement that such flawed, decaying organs were still able to hypnotize me on occasion.
"Now," Chelsea said.  "What do you mean by that?"
I shrugged.  "You keep pretending this is a partnership.  We both know it's a competition."
"A competition."
"You're trying to manipulate me into playing by your rules."
"What rules?"
"The way you want the relationship run.  I don't blame you, Chelse, not in the least.  We've been trying to manipulate each other for as long as—hell, it's not even Human nature.  It's mammalian."
"I don't believe it."  She shook her head.  Ropy tendrils of hair swung across her face.  "It's the middle of the twenty-first Century and you're hitting me with this war of the sexes bullshit?"
"Granted, your tweaks are a pretty radical iteration.  Get right in there and reprogram your mate for optimum servility."
"You actually think I'm trying to, to housebreak you?  You think I'm trying to train you like a puppy?" 
"You're just doing what comes naturally."
"I can't believe you'd pull this shit  on me."
"I thought you valued honesty in relationships."
"What relationship?  According to you there's no such thing.  This is just—mutual rape, or something."
"That's what relationships are."
 "Don't pull that shit on me."  She sat up, swung her feet over the edge of the bed.  Putting her back to me.  "I know how I feel.  If I know anything I know that much.  And I only wanted to make you happy."
"I know you believe that," I said gently.  "I know it doesn't feel like a strategy.  Nothing does when it's wired that deeply.  It just feels right, it feels natural.  It's nature's trick."
"It's someone's fucking trick."
I sat up next to her, let my shoulder brush hers.  She leaned away. 
"I know this stuff," I said after a while.  "I know how people work.  It's my job."
It was hers too, for that matter.  Nobody who spliced brains for a living could possibly be unaware of all that basic wiring in the sub-basement.  Chelsea had simply chosen to ignore it; to have admitted anything would have compromised her righteous anger.
I could have pointed that out too, I suppose, but I knew how much stress the system could take and I wasn't ready to test it to destruction.  I didn't want to lose her.  I didn't want to lose that feeling of safety, that sense that it made a difference whether I lived or died.  I only wanted her to back off a bit.   I only wanted room to breathe.
"You can be such a reptile sometimes," she said.
Mission accomplished.

*

Our first approach had been all caution and safety margins.  This time we came in like a strike force.
Scylla burned towards Rorschach at over two gees, its trajectory a smooth and predictable arc ending at the ruptured base camp.  It may have even landed there, for all I know; perhaps Sarasti had two-birded the mission, programmed the shuttle for some collecting of its own.  If so, it wouldn't land with us on board.  Scylla spat us into space almost fifty kilometers short of the new beachhead, left us naked and plummeting on some wireframe contraption with barely enough reaction mass for a soft landing and a quick getaway.  We didn't even have control over that:  success depended on unpredictability, and how better to ensure that than to not even know ourselves what we were doing?
Sarasti's logic. Vampire logic.  We could follow it partway:  the colossal deformation that had sealed Rorschach's breach was so much slower, so much more expensive than the dropgate that had trapped the Gang.  The fact that dropgates hadn't been used implied that they took time to deploy—to redistribute necessary mass, perhaps, or spring-load its reflexes.  That gave us a window.  We could still venture into the den so long as the lions couldn't predict our destination and set traps in advance.  So long as we got out again before they could set them afterwards.
"Thirty-seven minutes," Sarasti had said, and none of us could fathom how he'd come to that number.  Only Bates had dared to ask aloud, and he had merely glinted at her:  "You can't follow."
Vampire logic.  From an obvious premise to an opaque conclusion.  Our lives depended on it.
The retros followed some preprogrammed algorithm that mated Newton with a roll of the dice.  Our vector wasn't completely random—once we'd eliminated raceways and growth zones, areas without line-of-sight escape routes,  dead ends and unbranched segments ("Boring," Sarasti said, dismissing them), barely ten percent of the artefact remained in the running.  Now we dropped towards a warren of brambles eight kilometers from our original landing site.  Here in the midst of our final approach, there was no way that even we could predict our precise point of impact.
If Rorschach could, it deserved to win.
We fell.  Ridged spires and gnarled limbs sectioned the sky wherever I looked, cut the distant starscape and the imminent superJovian into a jagged mosaic veined in black.  Three kilometers away or thirty, the tip of some swollen extremity burst in a silent explosion of charged particles, a distant fog of ruptured, freezing atmosphere.  Even as it faded I could make out wisps and streamers swirling into complex spirals:  Rorschach's magnetic field, sculpting the artefact's very breath into radioactive sleet.
I'd never seen it with naked eyes before.  I felt like an insect on a starry midwinter's night, falling through the aftermath of a forest fire. 
The sled fired its brakes.  I snapped back against the webbing of my harness, bumped against the rebounding armored body next to me.  Sascha.  Only Sascha, I remembered.  Cunningham had sedated the rest of them, left this one core lonely and alone in the group body.  I hadn't even realized that that was possible with multiple personalities.  She stared back at me from behind her faceplate.  None of her surfaces showed through the suit.  I could see nothing in her eyes.
That was happening so often, these days.
Cunningham was not with us.  Nobody had asked why, when Sarasti assigned the berths.  The biologist was first among equals now, a backup restored with no other behind him.  The second-least replaceable of our irreplaceable crew.
It made me a better bargain.  The odds I bought had increased to one in three.
A silent bump shuddered up the frame.  I looked forward again, past Bates on the front pallet, past the anchored drones that flanked her two to each side.  The sled had launched its assault, a prefab inflatable vestibule mounted on an explosive injection assembly that would punch through Rorschach's skin like a virus penetrating a host cell.  The spindle-legged contraption dwindled and disappeared from my sight.  Moments later a pinpoint sodium sun flared and died against the ebony landscape ahead—antimatter charge, so small you could almost count the atoms, shot directly into the hull.  A lot rougher than the tentative foreplay of our first date.
We landed, hard, while the vestibule was still inflating.  The grunts were off the sled an instant before contact, spitting tiny puffs of gas from their nozzles, arranging themselves around us in a protective rosette.  Bates was up next, leaping free of her restraints and sailing directly towards the swelling hab.  Sascha and I unloaded the fiberop hub—a clamshell drum half a meter thick and three times as wide—lugging it between us while one of the grunts slipped through the vestibule's membranous airlock.
"Let's move, people."  Bates was hanging off one of the inflatable's handholds.  "Thirty minutes to—"
She fell silent.  I didn't have to ask why:  the advance grunt had positioned itself over the newly-blasted entrance and sent back its first postcard.
Light from below.

*

You'd think that would have made it easier.  Our kind has always feared the dark; for millions of years we huddled in caves and burrows while unseen things snuffled and growled—or just waited, silent and undetectable—in the night beyond.  You'd think that any light, no matter how meager, might strip away some of the shadows, leave fewer holes for the mind to fill with worst imaginings.
You'd think.
We followed the grunt down into a dim soupy glow like blood-curdled milk.  At first it seemed as though the atmosphere itself was alight, a luminous fog that obscured anything more than ten meters distant.  An illusion, as it turned out; the tunnel we emerged into was about three meters wide and lit by rows of raised  glowing dashes—the size and approximate shape of dismembered human fingers—wound in a loose triple helix around the walls.  We'd recorded similar ridges at the first site, although the breaks had not been so pronounced and the ridges had been anything but luminous.
"Stronger in the near-infrared," Bates reported, flashing the spectrum to our HUDs.  The air would have been transparent to pit vipers.  It was transparent to sonar:  the lead grunt sprayed the fog with click trains and discovered that the tunnel widened into some kind of chamber seventeen meters further along.  Squinting in that direction I could just make out subterranean outlines through the mist.  I could just make out jawed things, pulling back out of sight.
"Let's go," Bates said.
We plugged in the grunts, left one guarding the way out.  Each of us took another as a guardian angel on point.  The machines spoke to our HUDs via laser link; they spoke to each other along stiffened lengths of shielded fiberop that unspooled from the hub trailing in our wake.  It was the best available compromise in an environment without any optima.  Our tethered bodyguards would keep us all in touch during lone excursions around corners or down dead ends.
Yeah.  Lone excursions.  Forced to either split the group or cover less ground, we were to split the group.  We were speed-cartographers panning for gold.  Everything we did here was an act of faith:  faith that the unifying principals of Rorschach's internal architecture could be derived from the raw dimensions we'd grab on the run.  Faith that Rorschach's internal architecture even had unifying principles.  Earlier generations had worshipped malign and capricious spirits.  Ours put its faith in an ordered universe.  Here in the Devil's Baklava, it was easy to wonder if our ancestors hadn't been closer to the mark.
We moved along the tunnel.  Our destination resolved to merely human eyes:  not so much chamber as nexus, a knot of space formed by the convergence of a dozen tunnels angling in from different orientations.  Ragged meshes of quicksilver dots gleamed along several glistening surfaces; shiny protrusions poked through the substrate like a scattershot blast of ball-bearings pressed into wet clay.
I looked at Bates and Sascha.  "Control panel?"
Bates shrugged.  Her drones panned the throats around us, spraying sonar down each.  My HUD sketched a patchy three-d model from the echoes:  swathes of paint thrown against invisible walls.  We were dots near the center of a ganglion,  a tiny swarm of parasites infesting some great hollowed host.  Each tunnel curved away in a gradual spiral, each along a different orientation.  Sonar could peep around those bends a few meters further than we could.  Neither eyes nor ultrasonics saw anything to distinguish one choice from another.
Bates pointed down one of the passageways—"Keeton—"  and another— "Sascha,"  before turning to coast off down her own unbeaten path.
I looked uneasily down mine.  "Any particular—"
"Twenty-five minutes," she said.
I turned and jetted slowly down my assigned passageway.  The passage curved clockwise, a long unremarkable spiral; after twenty meters that curvature would have blocked any view of its entrance even if the foggy atmosphere hadn't.  My drone kept point across the tunnel, its sonar clicking like the chattering of a thousand tiny teeth, its tether unspooling back to the distant drum in the nexus.
It was a comfort, that leash.  It was short.  The grunts could stray ninety meters and no further, and we were under strict orders to stay under their wings at all times.  This dim infested burrow might lead all the way to hell, but I would not be expected to follow it nearly so far.  My cowardice had official sanction.
Fifty meters to go.  Fifty meters and I could turn and run with my tail between my legs.  In the meantime all I had to do was grit my teeth, and focus, and record:  everything you see, Sarasti had said.  As much as possible of what you can't.  And hope that this new reduced time limit would expire before Rorschach spiked us into gibbering dementia.
The walls around me twitched and shivered like the flesh of something just-killed. Something darted in and out of sight with a faint cackle of laughter.
Focus.  Record.  If the grunt doesn't see it, it's not real.
Sixty-five meters in, one of the ghosts got inside my helmet.
I tried to ignore it.  I tried to look away.  But this phantom wasn't flickering at the edge of vision; it hovered near the center of my faceplate, floating like a spot of swirling dizziness between me and the HUD.  I gritted my teeth and tried to look past, stared into the dim bloody haze of the middle distance, watched the jerky unfolding travelogues in the little windows labeled Bates and James.  Nothing out there.  But in here, floating before my eyes, Rorschach's latest headfuck smeared a fuzzy thumbprint right in front of the sonar feed.
"New symptom," I called in.  "Nonperipheral hallucination, stable, pretty formless though.  No spiking that I can—"
The inset marked Bates skidded hard about.  "Keet—"
Window and voice cut out together.
Not just Bates' window, either.  Sascha's inset and the drone's-eye sonarscape flickered and died at the same moment, stripped my HUD bare except for in-suit feeds and a little red readout flashing LINK DOWN.  I spun but the grunt was still there, three meters off my right shoulder.  Its optical port was clearly visible, a ruby thumbnail set into the plastron.
Its gun ports were visible too.  Pointing at me.
I froze.  The drone shivered in some local electromagnetic knot as if terrified.  Of me,  or—
Of something behind me…
I started to turn. My helmet filled with sudden static, and with what sounded—faintly—like a voice:
"—ucking move, Kee—not—"
"Bates?  Bates?"  Another icon had bloomed in place of LINK DOWN.  The grunt was using radio for some reason—and though almost close enough to touch, I could barely make out the signal.
A hash of Batespeak:  "—to your—right in front of—" and Sascha as well, a bit more clearly:  "—an't he see it?..."
"See what?  Sascha! Someone tell me what—see what?"
"—read?  Keeton, do you read?"
Somehow Bates had boosted the signal; static roared like an ocean, but I could hear the words behind it.  "Yes!  What—"
"Keep absolutely still, do you understand?  Absolutely still.  Acknowledge."
"Acknowledged."  The drone kept me in its shaky sights, dark stereocam irises spasming wide, stuttering to pinpoints.  "Wha—"
"There's something in front of you, Keeton.  Directly between you and the grunt.  Can't you see it?"
"N-no.  My HUD's down—"
Sascha broke in:  "How can he not see it it's right th—"
Bates barked over her:  "It's man-sized, radially symmetrical, eight, nine arms.  Like tentacles, but—segmented.  Spiky."
"I don't see anything," I said.  But I did: I saw something reaching for me, in my pod back aboard Theseus.  I saw something curled up motionless in the ship's spine, watching as we laid our best plans.
I saw Michelle the synesthesiac, curled into a fetal ball:  You can't see it...it's in—visible...
"What's it doing?" I called.  Why can't I see it?  Why can't I see it?
"Just—floating there.  Kind of waving.  Oh, sh—Keet—"
The grunt skidded sideways, as if slapped by a giant hand.  It bounced off the wall and suddenly the laser link was back, filling the HUD with intelligence:  first-person perspectives of Bates and Sascha racing along alien tunnels, a grunt's-eye view of a space suit with Keeton stenciled across its breastplate and there, right beside it, some thing like a rippling starfish with too many arms—
The Gang barreled around the curve and now I almost could see something with my own eyes, flickering like heat-lightning off to one side.  It was large, and it was moving, but somehow my eyes just slid off every time they tried to get a fix.  It's not real, I thought, giddy with hysterical relief, it's just another hallucination but then Bates sailed into view and it was right there, no flickering, no uncertainty, nothing but a collapsed probability wave and solid, undeniable mass.  Exposed, it grabbed the nearest wall and scrambled over our heads, segmented arms flailing like whips.  A sudden crackling buzz in the back of my head and it was drifting free again, charred and smoking.
A stuttering click.  The whine of machinery gearing down.  Three grunts hovered in formation in the middle of the passageway.  One faced the alien.  I glimpsed the tip of some lethal proboscis sliding back into its sheath.  Bates shut the grunt down before it had finished closing its mouth.
Optical links and three sets of lungs filled my helmet with a roar of heavy breathing. 
The offlined grunt drifted in the murky air.  The alien carcass bumped gently off the wall, twitching: a hydra of human backbones, scorched and fleshless.  It didn't look much like my on-board visions after all.
For some reason I couldn't put my finger on, I found that almost reassuring.
The two active grunts panned the fog until Bates gave them new orders; then one turned to secure the carcass, the other to steady its fallen comrade.  Bates grabbed the dead grunt and unplugged its tether.  "Fall back.  Slowly.  I'm right behind you."
I tweaked my jets.  Sascha hesitated.  Coils of shielded cable floated about us like umbilical cords. 
"Now," Bates said, plugging a feed from her own suit directly into the offlined grunt.
Sascha started after me.  Bates took up the rear.  I watched my HUD; a swarm of multiarmed monsters would appear there any moment.
They didn't.  But the blackened thing against the belly of Bates' machine was real enough.  Not a hallucination.  Not even some understandable artefact of fear and synesthesia.  Rorschach was inhabited.  Its inhabitants were invisible.  
Sometimes.  Sort of.
And, oh yeah.  We'd just killed one.
 
*

Bates threw the deactivated grunt into the sky as soon as we'd made vacuum.  Its comrades used it for target practice while we strapped in, firing and firing until there was nothing left but cooling vapor.  Rorschach spun even that faint plasma into filigree before it faded.
Halfway back to Theseus, Sascha turned to the Major:  "You—"
"No."
"But— they do shit on their own, right?  Autonomous."
"Not when they're slaved."
"Malfunction?  Spike?"
Bates didn't answer.
She called ahead.  By the time we made it back Cunningham had grown another little tumor on Theseus' spine, a remote surgery packed with teleops and sensors.  One of the surviving grunts grabbed the carcass and jumped ship as soon as we passed beneath the carapace, completing the delivery as we docked.
We were born again to the fruits of a preliminary necropsy.  The holographic ghost of the dissected alien rose from ConSensus like some flayed and horrific feast.  Its splayed arms looked like human spinal columns.  We sat around the table and waited for someone else to take the first bite.
"Did you have to shoot it with microwaves?" Cunningham sniped, tapping the table.  "You completely cooked the animal.  Every cell was blown out from the inside."
Bates shook her head.  "There was a malfunction."
He gave her a sour look.  "A malfunction that just happens to involve precise targeting of a moving object.  It doesn't sound random to me."
Bates looked back evenly.  "Something flipped autonomous targeting from off to on.  A coin toss.  Random."
"Random is—"
"Give it a rest, Cunningham.  I don't need this shit from you right now."
His eyes rolled in that smooth dead face, focused suddenly on something overhead.  I followed his gaze:  Sarasti stared down at us like an owl panning for meadow voles,  drifting slowly in the Coriolis breeze.
No visor this time, either.  I knew he hadn't lost it.
He fixed Cunningham.  "Your findings."
Cunningham swallowed.  Bits and pieces of alien anatomy flickered with color-coded highlights as he tapped his fingers. "Right, then.  I'm afraid I can't give you much at the cellular level.  There's not much left inside the membranes.  Not many membranes left, for that matter.  In terms of gross morphology, the specimen's dorsoventrally compressed and radially symmetrical, as you can see.  Calcareous exoskeleton, keratinised plastic cuticle.  Nothing special."
Bates looked skeptical.  "Plastic skin is 'nothing special'?"
"Given the environment I was half-expecting a Sanduloviciu plasma.  Plastic's simply refined petroleum.  Organocarbon.  This thing is carbon-based.  It's even protein based, although its proteins are a great deal tougher than ours.  Numerous sulphur cross-bonds for lateral bracing, as far as I could tell from what your grunts didn't denature."  Cunningham's eyes looked past us all; his consciousness was obviously far aft, haunting remote sensors.  "The thing's tissues are saturated with magnetite.  On earth you find that material in dolphin brains, migratory birds, even some bacteria—anything that navigates or orients using magnetic fields.  Moving up to macrostructures we've got a pneumatic internal skeleton, which as far as I can tell doubles as musculature.  Contractile tissue squeezes gas through a system of bladders that stiffen or relax each segment in the arms."
The light came back into Cunningham's eyes long enough to focus on his cigarette.  He brought it to his mouth, dragged deeply, set it down again.  "Note the invaginations around the base of each arm."  Flaccid balloons glowed orange on the virtual carcass.  "Cloacae, you could call them.  Everything opens into them: they eat, breathe, and defecate through the same little compartment.  No other major orifices."
The Gang made a face that said Sascha, grossed out.  "Don't things get—clogged up? Seems inefficient."
"If one gets plugged, there's eight other doors into the same system.  You'll wish you were so inefficient the next time you choke on a chicken bone." 
"What does it eat?" Bates asked.
"I couldn't say.  I found gizzard-like contractiles around the cloacae, which implies they chew on something, or did at some point in their history.  Other than that..."  He spread his hands; the cigarette left faint streamers in its wake.  "Inflate those contractiles enough and you create an airtight seal, by the way.  In conjunction with the cuticle, that would allow this organism to survive briefly in vacuum.  And we already know it can handle the ambient radiation, although don't ask me how.  Whatever it uses for genes must be a great deal tougher than ours."
"So it can survive in space," Bates mused.
"In the sense that a dolphin survives underwater.  Limited time only."
"How long?"
"I'm not certain."
"Central nervous system," Sarasti said.
Bates and the Gang grew suddenly, subtly still.  James's affect seeped out over her body, supplanting Sascha's.
Smoke curled from Cunningham's mouth and nose.  "There's nothing central about it, as it transpires.  No cephalisation, not even clustered sense organs.  The body's covered with something like eyespots, or chromatophores, or both.  There are setae everywhere.  And as far as I can tell—if all those little cooked filaments I've been able to put back together after your malfunction really are nerves and not something completely different—every one of those structures is under independent control."
Bates sat up straight.  "Seriously?"
He nodded.  "It would be akin to independently controlling the movement of each individual hair on your head, although this creature is covered with little hairs from tip to tip.  The same thing applies to the eyes.  Hundred of thousands of eyes, all over the cuticle.  Each one is barely more than a pinhole camera, but each is capable of independent focus and I'm guessing all the different inputs integrate somewhere up the line.  The entire body acts like a single diffuse retina.  In theory that gives it enormous visual acuity."
"A distributed telescope array," Bates murmured.
"A chromatophore underlies each eye—the pigment's some kind of cryptochrome so it's probably involved in vision, but it can also diffuse or contract through the local tissue.  That implies dynamic pigment patterns, like a squid or a chameleon."
"Background pattern-matching?" Bates asked.  "Would that explain why Siri couldn't see it?"
Cunningham opened a new window and played grainy looped imagery of Siri Keeton and his unseen dance partner.  The creature I hadn't noticed was ominously solid to the cameras:   a floating discoid twice as wide as my own torso, arms extending from its edges like thick knotted ropes.  Patterns rippled across its surface in waves; sunlight and shadow playing on a shallow seabed.
"As you can see, the background doesn't match the pattern," Cunningham said.  "It's not even close." 
"Can you explain Siri's blindness to it?" Sarasti said.
"I can't," Cunningham admitted.  "It's beyond ordinary crypsis.  But Rorschach makes you see all sorts of things that aren't there.  Not seeing something that is there might come down to essentially the same thing."
"Another hallucination?" I asked.
Another shrug while Cunningham sucked smoke.  "There are many ways to fool the human visual system.  It's interesting that the illusion failed when multiple witnesses were present, but if you want a definitive mechanism you'll have to give me more to work with than that."   He stabbed his cigarette hand at the crisped remains.
"But—" James took a breath, bracing herself— "We're talking about something... sophisticated, at least.  Something very complex.  A great deal of processing power."
Cunningham nodded again.  "I'd estimate nervous tissue accounts for about thirty percent of body mass."
"So it's intelligent."  Her voice was almost a whisper.
"Not remotely."
"But—thirty percent—"
"Thirty percent motor and sensory wiring." Another drag.  "Much like an octopus; an enormous number of neurons, but half of them get used up running the suckers."
"My understanding is that octopi are quite intelligent," James said.
"By molluscan standards, certainly.  But do you have any idea how much extra cabling you'd need if the photoreceptors in your eye were spread across your entire body?  You'd need about three hundred million extension cords to begin with, ranging from half a millimeter to two meters long.  Which means all your signals are staggered and out of synch, which means billions of additional logic gates to cohere the input.  And that just gets you a single static image, with no filtering, no interpretation, no time-series integration at all."  Shiver.  Drag.  "Now multiply that by all the extra wiring needed to focus all those eyespots on an object, or to send all that information back to individual chromatophores, and then add in the processing power you need to drive those chromatophores one at a time.  Thirty percent might do all that, but I strongly doubt you'd have much left over for philosophy and science."  He waved his hand in the general direction of the hold.  "That—that—"
"Scrambler," James suggested.
Cunningham rolled his tongue around it.  "Very well.  That scrambler is an absolute miracle of evolutionary engineering.  It's also dumb as a stick."
A moment's silence.
"So what is it?" James asked at last.  "Somebody's pet?"
"Canary in a coal mine," Bates suggested.
"Perhaps not even that," Cunningham said.  "Perhaps no more than a white blood cell with waldoes.  Maintenance bot, maybe.  Teleoperated, or instinct-driven.  But people, we're ignoring far greater questions here.  How could an anaerobe even develop complex multicellular anatomy, much less move as fast as this thing did?  That level of activity burns a great deal of ATP."
"Maybe they don't use ATP," Bates said as I thumbnailed:  adenosine triphosphate.  Cellular energy source.
"It was crammed with ATP," Cunningham told her.  "You can tell that much even with these remains.  The question is, how can it synthesize the stuff fast enough to keep up with demand.  Purely anaerobic pathways wouldn't suffice."
Nobody offered any suggestions.
"Anyway," he said, "So endeth the lesson.  If you want gory details, check ConSensus."  He wiggled the fingers of his free hand:  the spectral dissection vanished.  "I'll keep working, but if you want any real answers go get me a live one."  He butted out his cigarette against the bulkhead and stared defiantly around the drum.
The others hardly reacted; their topologies still sparkled from the revelations of a few minutes before.  Perhaps Cunningam's pet peeve was more important to the Big Picture; perhaps, in a reductionist universe, biochemical basics should always take priority over the finer points of ETI and interspecies etiquette.  But Bates and the Gang were time-lagged, processing earlier revelations.  Not just processing, either:  wallowing.  They clung to Cunningham's findings like convicted felons who'd just discovered they might be freed on a technicality.
Because the scrambler was dead at our hands, no doubt about it.  But it wasn't an alien, not really.  It wasn't intelligent.  It was just a blood cell with waldoes.  It was dumb as a stick.
And property damage is so much easier to live with than murder.

"Problems cannot be solved at the same level of awareness that created them"
—Einstein

Robert Paglino had set me up with Chelsea in the first place.  Maybe he felt responsible when the relationship started jumping the rails.   Or maybe Chelsea, Madam Fix-It that she was, had approached him for an intervention.  For whatever reason, it was obvious the moment we took our seats at QuBit's that his invitation had not been entirely social.
He went for some neurotrope cocktail on the rocks.  I stuck with Rickard's.
"Still old-school," Pag said.
"Still into foreplay," I observed.
"That obvious, huh?"  He took a sip.  "That'll teach me to try the subtle approach with a professional jargonaut."
"Jargonaut's got nothing to do with it.  You wouldn't have fooled a border collie."  Truth be told, Pag's topology never really told me much that I didn't already know.  I never really had much of an edge in reading him.  Maybe we just knew each other too well.
"So," he said, "spill."
"Nothing to spill.  She just got to know the real me."
"That is bad."
"What'd she tell you?"
"Me?  Nothing at all."
I gave him a look over the top of my glass.
He sighed.  "She knows you're cheating on her."
"I'm what?"
"Cheating.  With the skin."
"It's based on her!"
"But it isn't her."
"No it isn't.  It doesn't fart or fight or break into tears every time you don't want to be dragged off to meet its family.  Look, I love the woman dearly, but come on.  When was the last time you tried first-person fucking?"
"Seventy-four," he said.
"You're kidding."  I'd have guessed never.
"Did some third-world medical missionary work between gigs.  They still bump and grind in Texas."  Pag swigged his trope.  "Actually, I thought it was alright."
"The novelty wears off."
"Evidently."
"And it's not like I'm doing anything unusual here, Pag.  She's the one with the kink.  And it's not just the sex.  She keeps asking about—she keeps wanting to know things."
"Like what?"
"Irrelevant stuff.  My life as a kid.  My family.  Nobody's fucking business."
"She's just taking an interest.  Not everyone considers childhood memories off-limits, you know."
"Thanks for the insight."  As if people had never taken an interest before.  As if Helen hadn't taken an interest when she went through my drawers and filtered my mail and followed me from room to room, asking the drapes and the furniture why I was always so sullen and withdrawn.  She'd taken such an interest that she wouldn't let me out the door until I confided in her.  At twelve I'd been stupid enough to throw myself on her mercy, It's personal, Mom.   I'd just rather not talk about it.  Then I'd made my escape into the bathroom when she demanded to know if it was trouble online, trouble at school, was it a girl, was it a—a boy, what was it and why couldn't I just trust my own mother, don't I know I can trust her with anything?  I waited out the persistent knocking and the insistent concerned voice through the door and the final, grudging silence that followed.  I waited until I was absolutely sure she'd gone away, I waited for five fucking hours before I came out and there she was, arms folded in the hall, eyes brimming with reproach and disappointment.  That night she took the lock off the bathroom door because family should never shut each other out.  Still taking an interest.
"Siri," Pag said quietly.
I slowed my breathing, tried again:  "She doesn't just want to talk about family.  She wants to meet them.  She keeps trying to drag me to meet hers.  I thought I was hooking up with Chelsea, you know, nobody ever told me I'd have to share airspace with..."
"You do it?"
"Once." Reaching, grasping things, feigning acceptance, feigning friendship.  "It was great, if you like being ritually pawed by a bunch of play-acting strangers who can't stand the sight of you and don't have the guts to admit it."
Pag shrugged, unsympathetic.  "Sounds like typical old-school family.  You're a synthesist, man.  You deal with way wonkier dynamics than that."
"I deal with other people's information.  I don't vomit my own personal life into the public sphere.  Whatever hybrids and the constructs I work with, they don't—"
—touch—
"Interrogate," I finished.
"You knew Chelse was an old-fashioned girl right off the top."
"Yeah, when it suits her."  I gulped ale.  "But she's cutting-edge when she's got a splicer in her hand.  Which isn't to say that her strategies couldn't use some work."
"Strategies."
It's not a strategy, for God's sake!  Can't you see I'm hurting? I'm on the fucking floor, Siri, I'm curled up in a ball because I'm hurting so much and all you can do is criticize my tactics? What do I have to do, slash my goddamn wrists? 
I'd shrugged and turned away.  Nature's trick.
"She cries," I said now.  "High blood-lactate levels, makes it easy for her.  It's just chemistry but she holds it up like it was some kind of IOU."
Pag pursed his lips.  "Doesn't mean it's an act."
"Everything's an act.  Everything's strategy.  You know that."  I snorted.  "And she's miffed because I base a skin on her?"
"I don't think it's so much the actual skin as the fact that you didn't tell her.  You know how she feels about honesty in relationships."
"Sure.  She doesn't want any."
He looked at me.
"Give me some credit, Pag.  You think I should tell her that sometimes the sight of her makes me shudder?"
The system called Robert Paglino sat quietly, and sipped his drugs, and set the things he was about to say in order.  He took a breath.
"I can't believe you could be so fucking dumb," he said.
"Yeah?  Enlighten me."
"Of course she wants you to tell her you only have eyes for her, you love her pores and her morning breath, and why stop at one tweak how about ten.  But that doesn't mean she wants you to lie, you idiot.  She wants all that stuff to be true.  And—well, why can't it be?"
"It isn't," I said.
"Jesus, Siri.  People aren't rational.  You aren't rational.  We're not thinking machines, we're—we're feeling machines that happen to think."  He took a breath, and another hit.  "And you already know that, or you couldn't do your job.  Or at least—" He grimaced— "the system knows." 
"The system."
Me and my protocols, he meant.  My Chinese Room.
I took a breath.  "It doesn't work with everyone, you know."
"So I've noticed.  Can't read systems you're too entangled with, right?  Observer effect."
I shrugged.
"Just as well," he said.  "I don't think I'd like you all that much in that room of yours."
It came out before I could stop it:  "Chelse says she'd prefer a real one."
He raised his eyebrows.  "Real what?"
"Chinese Room.  She says it would have better comprehension."
The Qube murmured and clattered around us for a few moments.
"I can see why she'd say that," Pag said at last.  "But you— you did okay, Pod-man."
"I dunno."
He nodded, emphatic.  "You know what they say about the road less traveled?  Well, you carved your own road.  I don't know why.  It's like learning calligraphy using your toes, you know?  Or proprioceptive polyneuropathy.  It's amazing you can do it at all; it's mindboggling that you actually got good at it."
I squinted at him.  "Proprio—"
"There used to be people without any sense of—well, of themselves, physically.  They couldn't feel their bodies in space, had no idea how their own limbs were arranged or even if they had limbs.  Some of them said they felt pithed.  Disembodied.  They'd send a motor signal to the hand and just have to take it on faith that it arrived.  So they'd use vision to compensate; they couldn't feel where the hand was so they'd look at it while it moved, use sight as a substitute for the normal force-feedback you and I take for granted.  They could walk, if they kept their eyes focused on their legs and concentrated on every step.  They'd get pretty good at it.  But even after years of practice, if you distracted them in mid-step they'd go over like a beanstalk without a counterweight."
"You're saying I'm like that?"
"You use your Chinese room the way they used vision.  You've reinvented empathy, almost from scratch, and in some ways—not all obviously, or I wouldn't have to tell you this—but in some ways yours is better than the original.  It's why you're so good at synthesis."
I shook my head.  "I just observe, that's all.  I watch what people do, and then I imagine what would make them do that."
"Sounds like empathy to me."
"It's not. Empathy's not so much about imagining how the other guy feels.  It's more about imagining how you'd feel in the same place, right?"
Pag frowned.  "So?"
"So what if you don't know how you'd feel?"
He looked at me, and his surfaces were serious and completely transparent. "You're better than that, friend.  You may not always act like it, but—I know you.  I knew you before."
"You knew someone else.  I'm Pod-man, remember?"
"Yeah, that was someone else.  And maybe I remember him better than you do.  But I'll tell you one thing."  He leaned forward.  "Both of you would've helped me out that day.  And maybe he would've got there with good ol'-fashioned empathy while you had to cobble together some kind of improvised flowchart out of surplus parts, but that just makes your accomplishment all the greater.  Which is why I continue to stick it out with you, old buddy.  Even though you have a rod up your ass the size of the Rio Spire."
He held out his glass.  Dutifully, I clinked it against my own.  We drank.
"I don't remember him," I said after a while.
"What, the other Siri?  Pre-Pod Siri?"
I nodded.
"Nothing at all?"
I thought back.  "Well, he was wracked by convulsions all the time, right?  There'd be constant pain.  I don't remember any pain."  My glass was almost empty; I sipped to make it last.  "I—I dream about him sometimes, though.  About— being him."
"What's it like?"
"It was—colorful.  Everything was more saturated, you know?  Sounds, smells.  Richer than life."
"And now?"
I looked at him.
"You said it was colorful. What changed?"
"I don't know.  Maybe nothing.  I just— I don't actually remember the dreams when I wake up any more."
"So how do you know you still have them?" Pag asked.
Fuck it I thought, and tipped back the last of my pint in a single gulp.  "I know."
"How?"
I frowned, taken aback.  I had to think for a few moments before I remembered. 
"I wake up smiling," I said.

"Grunts look the enemy in the eye.  Grunts know the stakes.  Grunts know the price of poor strategy.  What do the generals know?  Overlays and Tactical plots.  The whole chain of command is upside-down."
—Kenneth Lubin, Zero Sum

It went bad from the moment we breached.  The plan had called for precise havoc along the new beachhead, subtly arranged to entrap some blood-cell-with-waldoes as it sought to repair the damage.  Our job had been to set the trap and stand back, trusting Sarasti's assurances that we would not have long to wait.
We had no time at all.  Something squirmed in the swirling dust the moment we breached, serpentine movement down the hole that instantly kicked Bates renowned field initiative into high gear.   Her grunts dived through and caught a scrambler twitching in their crosshairs, clinging to the wall of the passageway.  It must have been stunned by the blast of our entry, a classic case of wrong-place-wrong-time.  Bates took a split-second to appraise the opportunity and the plan was plasma.  
One of the grunts plugged the scrambler with a biopsy dart before I even had a chance to blink.  We would have bagged the whole animal right then if Rorschach's magnetosphere hadn't chosen that moment to kick sand in our faces.  As it was, by the time our grunts staggered back into action their quarry was already disappearing around the bend.  Bates was tethered to her troops; they yanked her down the rabbit hole ("Set it up!" she yelled back at Sascha) the moment she let them loose.
I was tethered to Bates.  I barely had a chance to exchange a wide-eyed look with Sascha before being yanked away in turn.  Suddenly I was inside again; the sated biopsy dart bounced off my faceplate and flashed past, still attached to a few meters of discarded monofilament.  Hopefully Sascha would pick it up while Bates and I were hunting; at least the mission wouldn't be a total loss if we never made it back.
The grunts dragged us like bait on a hook.  Bates flew like a dolphin just ahead of me, keeping effortlessly to the center of the bore with an occasional tweak of her jets.  I careened off the walls just behind, trying to stabilize myself, trying to look as though I too might be in control.  It was an important pretense.  The whole point of being a decoy is to pass yourself off as an original.  They'd even given me my own gun,  pure precaution of course, more for comfort than protection.   It hugged my forearm and fired plastic slugs impervious to induction fields.
Just Bates and I, now.  A pacifist soldier, and the odds of a coin toss.
Gooseflesh prickled my skin as it always had.  The usual ghosts scrabbled and clawed through my mind.  This time, though, the dread seemed muted.  Distant.  Perhaps it was just a matter of timing, perhaps we were moving so quickly through the magnetic landscape that no one phantom had a chance to stick.  Or maybe it was something else.  Maybe I wasn't so afraid of ghosts because this time we were after monsters.
The scrambler seemed to have thrown off whatever cobwebs our entrance had spun; it surged along the walls now at full speed, its arms shooting ahead like a succession of striking snakes, slinging the body forward so fast the drones could barely keep it in sight, a writhing silhouette in the fog.  Suddenly it leapt sideways, sailing across the width of the passageway and down some minor tributary.  The grunts veered in pursuit, crashing into walls, stumbling—
—stopping—
—and suddenly Bates was braking hard, shooting back past me as I flailed with my pistol.  I was past the drones in the next instant; my leash snapped tight and snapped back, bringing me to a dead drifting stop.  For a second or two I was on the front line.  For a second or two I was the front line, Siri Keeton, note taker, mole, professional uncomprehender.   I just floated there, breath roaring in my helmet, as a few meters further on the walls— 
Squirmed...
Peristalsis, I thought at first.  But this motion was utterly unlike the slow, undulating waves that usually rippled along Rorschach's passageways.  So hallucination, I thought instead— and then those writhing walls reached out with a thousand whiplike calcareous tongues that grabbed our quarry from every direction and tore it to pieces...
Something grabbed me and spun me around.  Suddenly I was locked against the chest of one of the grunts, its rear guns firing as we retreated back up the tunnel at full speed.  Bates was in the arms of the other.  Seething motion receded behind us but the image stayed stuck to the backs of my eyes, hallucinatory and point-blank in its clarity:
Scramblers, everywhere.  A seething infestation squirming across the walls, reaching out for the intruder, leaping into the lumen of the passageway to press their counterattack. 
Not against us.  They had attacked one of their own.  I'd seen three of its arms ripped off before it had disappeared into a writhing ball in the center of the passageway.
We fled.  I turned to Bates—Did you see—but held my tongue.   The deathly concentration on her face was unmistakable even across two faceplates and three meters of methane.  According to HUD she'd lobotomized both grunts, bypassed all that wonderful autonomous decision-making circuitry entirely.  She was running both machines herself, as manually as marionettes.
 Grainy turbulent echoes appeared on the rear sonar display.  The scramblers had finished with their sacrifice.  Now they were coming after us.  My grunt stumbled and careened against the side of the passage.  Jagged shards of alien décor dug parallel gouges across my faceplate, tenderized chunks of thigh through the shielded fabric of my suit.  I clenched down on a cry.  It got out anyway.  Some ridiculous in-suit alarm chirped indignantly an instant before a dozen rotten eggs broke open inside my helmet.  I coughed.  My eyes stung and watered in the reek; I could barely see Seiverts on the HUD, flashing instantly into the red. 
 Bates drove us on without a word.
My faceplate healed enough to shut off the alarm.  My air began to clear.  The scramblers had gained;  by the time I could see clearly again they were only a few meters behind us.  Up ahead Sascha came into view around the bend,  Sascha who had no backup, whose other cores had all been shut down on Sarasti's orders.  Susan had protested at first—
"If there's any opportunity to communicate—"
"There won't be," he'd said. 
—so there was Sascha who was more resistant to Rorschach's influence according to some criterion I never understood, curled up in a fetal ball with her gloves clamped against her helmet and I could only hope to some dusty deity that she'd set the trap before this place had got to her.  And here came the scramblers, and Bates was shouting "Sascha!  Get out of the fucking way!" and braking hard, way too soon, the scrambling horde nipping at our heels like a riptide and Bates yelled "Sascha!" again and finally Sascha moved, kicked herself into gear and off the nearest wall and fled right back up the hole we'd blown in through.  Bates yanked some joystick in her head and our warrior sedans slewed and shat sparks and bullets and dove out after her.
Sascha had set the trap just within the mouth of the breach.  Bates armed it in passing with the slap of one gloved hand.  Motion sensors were supposed to do the rest— but the enemy was close behind, and there was no room to spare.
It went off just as I was emerging into the vestibule.  The cannon net shot out behind me in a glorious exploding conic, caught something, snapped back up the rabbit hole and slammed into my grunt from behind.  The recoil kicked us against the top of the vestibule so hard I thought the fabric would tear.  It held, and threw us back against the squirming things enmeshed in our midst.
Writhing backbones everywhere.  Articulated arms, lashing like bony whips.  One of them entwined my leg and squeezed like a brick python.  Bates' hands waved in a frantic dance before me and that arm came apart into dismembered segments, bouncing around the enclosure.
This was all wrong.  They were supposed to be in the net, they were supposed to be contained...
"Sascha!  Launch!" Bates barked.  Another arm separated from its body and careened into the wall, coiling and uncoiling.
The hole had flooded with aerosol foam-core as soon as we'd pulled the net.  A scrambler writhed half-embedded in that matrix, caught just a split-second too late; its central mass protruded like some great round tumor writhing with monstrous worms. 
"SASCHA!"
Artillery.  The floor of the vestibule irised shut quick as a leg-hold trap and everything slammed against it, grunts, people, scramblers whole and in pieces.  I couldn't breathe.  Every thimbleful of flesh weighed a hundred kilograms.  Something slapped us to one side, a giant hand batting an insect.  Maybe a course correction.  Maybe a collision.
But ten seconds later we were weightless again, and nothing had torn us open.
We floated like mites in a ping-pong ball, surrounded by a confusion of machinery and twitching body parts.  There was little of anything that might pass for blood.  What there was floated in clear, shuddering spherules.  The cannon net floated like a shrink-wrapped asteroid in our midst.  The things inside had wrapped their arms around themselves, around each other, curled into a shivering and unresponsive ball.  Compressed methonia hissed around them, keeping them fresh for the long trip home. 
"Holy shit," Sascha breathed, watching them.  "The bloodsucker called it."
He hadn't called everything.  He hadn't called a mob of multiarmed aliens ripping one of their own to pieces before my eyes.  He hadn't seen that coming.
Or at least, he hadn't mentioned it.
I was already feeling nauseous.  Bates was carefully bringing her wrists together.  For a moment I could barely make out a taut dark thread of freakwire, fine as smoke, between them.  Her caution was well-advised; that stuff would slice through human limbs as easily as alien ones.  One of the grunts groomed its mouthparts at her shoulder, cleaning gore from its mandibles. 
The freakwire vanished from my sight.  Sight itself was dimming, now.  The inside of this great lead balloon was going dark around me.  We were coasting, purely ballistic.  We had to trust that Scylla would swoop in and snatch us once we'd achieved a discreet distance from the scene of the crime.  We had to trust Sarasti.
That was getting harder by the hour.  But he'd been right so far.  Mostly.
"How do you know?" Bates had asked when he'd first laid out the plan.  He hadn't answered.  Chances are he couldn't have, not to us, any more than a baseline could have explained brane theory to the inhabitants of Flatland.  But Bates hadn't been asking about tactics anyway, not really.  Maybe she'd been asking for a reason, for something to justify this ongoing trespass into foreign soil, the capture and slaughter of its natives.
On one level she already knew the reason, of course.  We all did.  We could not afford to merely react.  The risks were too great; we had to preempt.   Sarasti, wise beyond all of us, saw this more clearly than we.  Amanda Bates knew he was right in her mind—but perhaps she didn't feel it in her gut.  Perhaps, I thought as my vision failed, she was asking Sarasti to convince her.
But that wasn't all she was doing.

*

Imagine you are Amanda Bates.
The control you wield over your troops would give wet dreams and nightmares to generals of ages past.  You can drop instantly into the sensorium of anyone under your command, experience the battlefield from any number of first-person perspectives.  Your every soldier is loyal unto death, asking no questions, obeying all commands with alacrity and dedication to which mere flesh could never even aspire.  You don't just respect a chain of command:  you are one.
You are a little bit scared of your own power.  You are a little bit scared of the things you've already done with it.
Taking orders comes as naturally as giving them.  Oh, you've been known to question policy on occasion, or seek a bigger picture than may be strictly necessary for the job at hand.  Your command initiative has become the stuff of legends.  But you have never disobeyed  a direct order.  When asked for your perspective, you serve it straight up and unvarnished— until the decision is made, and the orders handed down.  Then you do your job without question.  Even when questions arise, you would hardly waste time asking them unless you expected an answer you could use. 
Why, then, demand analytical details from a vampire?
Not for information.  Might as well expect the sighted to explain vision to the congenitally blind.  Not for clarification; there was no ambiguity in Sarasti's bottom line.  Not even for the benefit of poor dumb Siri Keeton, who may have missed some salient point but is too ashamed to raise his own hand.
No, there is only one reason why you might ask for such details: to challenge.  To rebel, to the infinitesimal degree that rebellion is permitted once the word is given.
You argued and advocated as forcefully as you could, back when Sarasti was soliciting input.  But he ignored yours, abandoned any attempt at communication and preemptively invaded foreign territory.  He knew that Rorschach might contained living beings and still he tore it open without regard for their welfare.  He may have killed helpless innocents.  He may have roused an angry giant.  You don't know.
All you know is, you've been helping him do it.
You've seen this kind of arrogance before, among your own kind.  You had hoped that smarter creatures would be wiser ones.  Bad enough to see such arrogant stupidity inflicted on the helpless, but to do it at these stakes beggars belief.  Killing innocents is the least of the risks you're running; you're gambling with the fate of worlds, provoking conflict with a star faring technology whose sole offense was to take your picture without permission.
Your dissent has changed nothing.  So you reign it in; all that slips out now is the occasional pointless question with no hope of an answer, its inherent insubordination so deeply buried you don't even see it yourself.  If you did see it, you'd keep your mouth shut entirely—because the last thing you want is to remind Sarasti that you think he's wrong.  You don't want him dwelling on that.  You don't want him to think you're up to something.
Because you are.  Even if you're not quite ready to admit it to yourself.
Amanda Bates is beginning to contemplate a change of command.

*

The laceration of my suit had done a real number on the gears.  It took three solid days for Theseus to bring me back to life.  But death was no excuse for falling behind the curve; I resurrected with a head full of updates clogging my inlays.
I flipped through them, climbing down into the drum.  The Gang of Four sat at the galley below me, staring at untouched portions of nutritionally-balanced sludge on her plate.  Cunningham, over in his inherited domain, grunted at my appearance and turned back to work, the fingers of one hand tapping compulsively on the desktop.
Theseus' orbit had widened during my absence, and most of its eccentricities had been planed away.  Now we kept our target in view from a more-or-less constant range of three thousand kilometers.  Our orbital period lagged Rorschach's by an hour—the alien crept implacably ahead of us along its lower trajectory—but a supplementary burn every couple of weeks would be enough to keep it in sight.  We had specimens now, things to be examined under conditions of our own choosing; no point in risking any more close approaches until we'd wrung every useful datum from what we had.
Cunningham had expanded his lab space during my time in the sepulcher.  He'd built holding pens, one for each scrambler, modules partitioned by a common wall and installed in a whole new hab.  The microwaved carcass had been sidelined like a discarded toy from a previous birthday, although according to the access logs Cunningham still visited it every now and then.  
Not that he visited any part of the new wing in person, of course.  Not that he was even able to, not without suiting up and jumping across the hold.  The whole compartment had been disconnected from its spinal lock and pushed to a tethered anchorage midway between spine and carapace:  Sarasti's orders, given to minimize risk of contamination.  It was no skin off Cunningham's nose.  He was happier leaving his body in pseudogravity anyway, while his consciousness flitted between the waldoes and sensors and bric-a-brac surrounding his new pets.
Theseus saw me coming and pushed a squeezebulb of sugary electrolytes from the galley dispenser.  The Gang didn't look up as I passed.  One forefinger tapped absently against their temple, the lips pursed and twitched in the characteristic mode that said internal dialog in progress.  I could never tell who was on top when they were like that.
I sucked on the squeezebulb and looked in on the pens.  Two cubes suffused in pale red light: in one a scrambler floated center stage, waving its segmented arms like seaweed in gentle surge.  The occupant of the other cage was squeezed into a corner, four arms splayed across the converging walls; four others extended, waving again, into open space.  The bodies from which those arms sprouted were spheroids, not flattened disks as our first—sample had been.   They were only slightly compressed, and their arms sprouted not from a single equatorial band but from across the whole surface.
Fully-extended, the floating scrambler was over two meters across.  The other seemed roughly the same size.  Neither moved, except for those drifting arms.  Navy-blue mosaics, almost black in the longwave, rippled across their surfaces like the patterns of wind on grass.  Superimposed graphics plotted methane and hydrogen at reassuring Rorschach norms.  Temperature and lighting, ditto.  An icon for ambient electromagnetics remained dark.
I dipped into the archives, watched the arrival of the aliens from two days past; each tumbling unceremoniously into its pen, balled up, hugging themselves as they bounced gently around their enclosures.  Fetal position, I thought—but after a few moments the arms uncoiled, like the blooming of calcareous flowers.
"Robert says Rorschach grows them,"  Susan James said behind me.
I turned.  Definitely James in there, but—muted, somehow.  Her meal remained untouched.  Her surfaces were dim.
Except for the eyes.  Those were deep, and a little hollow.  
"Grows?" I repeated.
"In stacks.  They have two navels each."  She managed a weak smile, touched her belly with one hand and the small of her back with the other.  "One in front, one behind.  He thinks  they grow in a kind of column, piled up.  When the top one develops to a certain point, it buds off from the stack and becomes free-living."
 The archived scramblers were exploring their new environment now, climbing gingerly along the walls, unrolling their arms along the corners where the panels met.  Those swollen central bodies struck me again.  "So that first one, with the flattened..."
"Juvenile," she agreed.  "Fresh off the stack.  These ones are older.  They, they plump out as they mature.  Robert says," she added after a moment.
I sucked the dregs from my squeezebulb.  "The ship grows its own crew."
"If it's a ship." James shrugged.  "If they're crew."
I watched them move.  There wasn't much to explore; the walls were almost bare, innocent of anything but a few sensor heads and gas nozzles.  The pens had their own tentacles and manipulators for more invasive research needs, but those had been carefully sheathed during introduction.  Still, the creatures covered the territory in careful increments, moving back and forth along parallel, invisible paths.  Almost as if they were running transects.
James had noticed it too.  "It seems awfully systematic, doesn't it?"
"What does Robert say about that?"
"He says the behavior of honeybees and sphex wasps is just as complex, and it's all rote hardwiring.  Not intelligence."
"But bees still communicate, right?  They do that dance, to tell the hive where the flowers are."
She shrugged, conceding the point.
"So you still might be able to talk to these things."
"Maybe.  You'd think."  She massaged her brow between thumb and forefinger.  "We haven't got anywhere, though.  We played some of their pigment patterns back to them, with variations.  They don't seem to make sounds.  Robert synthesized a bunch of noises that they might squeeze out of their cloacae if they were so inclined, but those didn't get us anywhere either.  Harmonic farts, really." 
"So we're sticking to the blood-cells-with-waldoes model."
"Pretty much.  But you know, they didn't go into a loop.  Hardwired animals repeat themselves.  Even smart ones pace, or chew their fur.  Stereotyped behaviors.  But these two, they gave everything a very careful once-over and then just—shut down."
They were still at it in ConSensus, slithering across one wall, then another, then another, a slow screw-thread track that would leave no square centimeter uncovered.
"Have they done anything since?" I asked.
She shrugged again.  "Nothing spectacular.  They squirm when you poke them.  Wave their arms back and forth—they do that pretty much constantly, but there's no information in it that we can tell.  They haven't gone invisible on us or anything.  We blanked the adjoining wall for a while so they could see each other, even piped audio and air feeds—Robert thought there might be some kind of pheromonal communication—but nothing.  They didn't even react to each other."
"Have you tried, well, motivating them?"
"With what, Siri?  They don't seem to care about their own company.  We can't bribe them with food unless we know what they eat, which we don't.  Robert says they're in no immediate danger of starvation anyway.  Maybe when they get hungry they can deal."
I killed the archival feed and reverted to realtime.  "Maybe they eat—I don't know, radiation.  Or magnetic energy.  The cage can generate magnetic fields, right?" 
"Tried it."  She took a breath, then squared her shoulders.  "But I guess these things take time.  He's only had a couple of days, and I only got out of the crypt myself a day ago.  We'll keep trying."
"What about negative reinforcement?" I wondered.
She blinked.  "Hurt them, you mean."
"Not necessarily anything extreme.  And if they're not sentient anyway..."
Just like that, Susan went away. "Why, Keeton.  you just made a suggestion.  You giving up on this whole noninterference thing?"
"Hello, Sascha.  No, of course not.  Just—making a list of what's been tried."
"Good."  There was an edge to her voice.  "Hate to think you were slipping.  We're going to grab some down time now, so maybe you could go and talk to Cunningham for a bit.  Yeah, do that.  
"And be sure to tell him your theory about radiation-eating aliens.  I bet he could use a laugh."

*

He stood at his post in BioMed, though his empty chair was barely a meter away.  The ubiquitous cigarette hung from between the fingers of one hand, burned down and burned out.  His other hand played with itself, fingers tapping against thumb in sequence, little to index, index to little.  Windows crawled with intelligence in front of him; he wasn't watching.  
I approached from behind.  I watched his surfaces in motion.  I heard the soft syllables rising from his throat:
"Yit-barah v'yish-tabah v'yit-pa-ar v'yit-romam..."
Not his usual litany.  Not even his usual language;  Hebrew, ConSensus said.
It sounded almost like a prayer...
He must have heard me.  His topology went flat and hard and almost impossible to decipher.  It was increasingly difficult getting a fix on anyone these days, but even through those topological cataracts Cunningham— as always— was a tougher read than most.
"Keeton," he said without turning.
"You're not Jewish," I said.
"It was."  Szpindel, I realized after a moment.  Cunningham didn't do gender pronouns. 
But Isaac Szpindel had been an atheist.  All of us were.  We'd all started out that way, at least.
"I didn't know you knew him," I said.  It certainly wasn't policy.
Cunningham sank into his chair without looking at me.  In his head, and in mine, a new window opened within a frame marked Electrophoresis.
I tried again.  "I'm sorry.  I didn't mean to intru—"
"What can I do for you, Siri?"
"I was hoping you could bring me up to speed on your findings."
A periodic chart of alien elements scrolled through the feed.  Cunningham logged it and started another sample.  "I've documented everything.  It's all in ConSensus."
I made a play for ego:  "It would really help to know how you'd thumbnail it, though.  What you think is important can be just as vital as the data themselves."
He looked at me a moment.  He muttered something, repetitive and irrelevant.
"What's important is what's missing," he said after a moment.  "I've got good samples now and I still can't find the genes.  Protein synthesis is almost prionic—reconformation instead of the usual transcription pathways—but I can't figure out how those bricks get slotted into the wall once they're made."
"Any progress on the energy front?" I asked.
"Energy?"
"Aerobic metabolism on an anaerobe budget, remember? You said they had too much ATP."
"That I solved."   He puffed smoke; far to stern a fleck of alien tissue liquefied and banded into chemical strata.  "They're sprinting."
Rotate that if you can.
I couldn't.  "How do you mean?"
He sighed.  "Biochemistry is a tradeoff.  The faster you synthesize ATP, the more expensive each molecule becomes.  It turns out scramblers are a lot more energy-efficient at making it than we are.  They're just extremely slow at it, which might not be a big drawback for something that spends most of its time inactive.  Rorschach—whatever Rorschach started out as— could have drifted for millennia before it washed up here.  That's a lot of time to build up an energy reserve for bouts of high activity, and once you've laid the groundwork glycolysis is explosive.  Two-thousand-fold boost, and no oxygen demand."
"Scramblers sprint.  Their whole lives." 
"They may come preloaded with ATP and burn it off throughout their lifespan."
"How long would that be?"
"Good question," he admitted.  "Live fast, die young.  If they ration it out, stay dormant most of the time—who knows?"
"Huh." The free-floating scrambler had drifted away from the center of its pen.  One extended arm held a wall at bay; the others continued their hypnotic swaying.
I remembered other arms, their motion not so gentle.
"Amanda and I chased one into a crowd.  It—"
Cunningham was back at his samples.  "I saw the record."
"They tore it to pieces."
"Uh huh."
"Any idea why?"
He shrugged.  "Bates thought there might be some kind of civil war going on down there."
"What do you think?"
"I don't know.  Maybe it's right, or maybe scramblers are ritual cannibals, or—they're aliens, Keeton.  What do you want from me?"
"But they're not really aliens.  At least not intelligent ones. War implies intelligence."
"Ants wage war all the time.  Proves nothing except that they're alive."
"Are scramblers even alive?" I asked.
"What kind of question is that?"
"You think Rorschach grows them on some kind of assembly line.  You can't find any genes.  Maybe they're just biomechanical machines."
"That's what life is, Keeton.  That's what you are." Another hit of nicotine, another storm of numbers, another sample.  "Life isn't either/or.  It's a matter of degree."
"What I'm asking is, are they natural?  Could they be constructs?"
"Is a termite mound a construct?  Beaver dam?  Space ship?  Of course.  Were they built by naturally-evolved organisms, acting naturally?  They were.  So tell me how anything in the whole deep multiverse can ever be anything but natural?"
I tried to keep the irritation out of my voice.  "You know what I mean."
"It's a meaningless question.  Get your head out of the Twentieth Century."
I gave up.  After a few seconds Cunningham seemed to notice the silence.  He withdrew his consciousness from the machinery and looked around with fleshly eyes, as if searching for some mosquito that had mysteriously stopped whining.
"What's your problem with me?" I asked.  Stupid question, obvious question.  Unworthy of any synthesist to be so, so direct.
His eyes glittered in that dead face.  "Processing without comprehension.  That's what you do, isn't it?"
"That's a colossal oversimplification."
"Mmm."  Cunningham nodded.  "Then why can't you seem to comprehend how pointless it is to keep peeking over our shoulders and writing home to our masters?"
"Someone has to keep Earth in the loop."
"Seven months each way.  Long loop."  
"Still."
"We're on our own out here, Keeton.  You're on your own.  The game's going to be long over before our masters even know it's started." He sucked smoke.  "Or perhaps not.  Perhaps you're talking to someone closer, hmm?  That it?  Is the Fourth Wave telling you what to do?"
"There is no Fourth Wave.  Not that anyone's told me, anyway."
"Probably not.  They'd never risk their lives out here, would they?  Too dangerous even to hang back and watch from a distance.  That's why they built us."
"We're all self-made.  Nobody forced you to get the rewire."
"No, nobody forced me to get the rewire.  I could have just let them cut out my brain and pack it into Heaven, couldn't I?  That's the choice we have.  We can be utterly useless, or we can try and compete against the vampires and the constructs and the AIs.  And perhaps you could tell me how to do that without turning into a—an utter freak."
So much in the voice.  Nothing at all on the face.  I said nothing.
"See what I mean?  No comprehension."  He managed a tight smile.  "So I'll answer your questions.  I'll delay my own work and hold your hand because Sarasti's told us to.  I guess that superior vampire mind sees some legitimate reason to indulge your constant ankle-nipping, and it's in charge so I'll play along.  But I'm not nearly that smart, so you'll forgive me if it all seems a bit naff."  
"I'm just—"
"You're just doing your job.  I know.  But I don't like being played, Keeton.  And that's what your job is."

*

Even back on Earth, Robert Cunningham had barely disguised his opinion of the ship's commissar.  It had been obvious even to the topologically blind.
I'd always had a hard time imagining the man.  It wasn't just his expressionless face.  Sometimes, not even the subtler things behind would show up in his topology.  Perhaps he repressed them deliberately, resenting the presence of this mole among the crew.
It would hardly have been the first time I'd encountered such a reaction.  Everyone resented me to some extent.  Oh, they liked me well enough, or thought they did.  They tolerated my intrusions, and cooperated, and gave away far more than they thought they did. 
But beneath Szpindel's gruff camaraderie, beneath James's patient explanations—there was no real respect.  How could there be?  These people were the bleeding edge, the incandescent apex of hominid achievement.  They were trusted with the fate of the world.  I was just a tattletale for small minds back home.  Not even that much, when home receded too deeply into the distance.  Superfluous mass.  Couldn't be helped.  No use getting bothered over it.
Still, Szpindel had only coined commissar half-jokingly.  Cunningham believed it, and didn't laugh.  And while I'd encountered many others like him over the years, those had only tried to hide themselves from sight.  Cunningham was the first who seemed to succeed.
I tried to build the relationship all the way through training, tried to find the missing pieces.  I watched him working the simulator's teleops one day, exercising the shiny new interfaces that spread him through walls and wires.  He was practicing his surgical skills on some hypothetical alien the computer had conjured up to test his technique.  Sensors and jointed teleops sprouted like the legs of an enormous spider crab from an overhead mount.  Spirit-possessed, they dipped and weaved around some semiplausible holographic creature.  Cunningham's own body merely trembled slightly, a cigarette jiggling at the corner of its mouth.
I waited for him to take a break.  Eventually the tension ebbed from his shoulders.  His vicarious limbs relaxed.
"So." I tapped my temple.  "Why'd you do it?"
He didn't turn.  Above the dissection, sensors swiveled and stared back like dismembered eyestalks.  That was the center of Cunningham's awareness right now, not this nicotine-stained body in front of me.  Those were his eyes, or his tongue, or whatever unimaginable bastard-senses he used to parse what the machines sent him.  Those clusters aimed back at me, at us—and if Robert Cunningham still possessed anything that might be called vision, he was watching himself from eyes two meters outside his own skull. 
"Do what, exactly?" he said at last.  "The enhancements?"
Enhancements.  As though he'd upgraded his wardrobe instead of ripping out his senses and grafting new ones into the wounds.
I nodded.
"It's vital to keep current," he said.  "If you don't reconfigure you can't retrain.  If you don’t retrain you're obsolete inside a month, and then you're not much good for anything except Heaven or dictation."
I ignored the jibe.  "Pretty radical transformation, though."
"Not these days."
"Didn't it change you?"
His body dragged on the cigarette.  Targeted ventilation sucked away the smoke before it reached me.   "That's the whole point." 
"Surely you were affected personally, though.  Surely—"
"Ah."  He nodded; at the far end of shared motor nerves, teleops jiggled in sympathy.  "Change the eyes that look at the world, change the me does the looking?"
"Something like that."
Now he was watching me with fleshly eyes.  Across the membrane those snakes and eyestalks returned to their work on the virtual carcass, as if deciding they'd wasted enough time on pointless distractions.  I wondered which body he was in now.  
"I'm surprised you'd have to ask," the meat one said. "Doesn't my body language tell you everything?  Aren't jargonauts supposed to read minds?"
He was right, of course.  I wasn't interested in Cunningham's words; those were just the carrier wave.  He couldn't hear the real conversation we were having.  All his angles and surfaces spoke volumes, and although their voices were strangely fuzzed with feedback and distortion I knew I'd be able to understand them eventually.  I only had to keep him talking.
But Jukka Sarasti chose that moment to wander past and surgically trash my best-laid plans. 
"Siri's best in his field," he remarked.  "But not when it gets too close to home." 

Why should man expect his prayer for mercy to be heard by What is above him when he shows no mercy to what is under him?  
—Pierre Troubetzkoy

"The thing is," Chelsea said, "this whole first-person thing takes effort.  You have to care enough to try, you know?  I've been working my ass off on this relationship, I've been working so hard, but you just don't seem to care..."
She thought she was breaking the news.  She thought I hadn't seen it coming, because I hadn't said anything.  I'd probably seen it before she had.  I hadn't said anything because I'd been scared of giving her an opening.
I felt sick to my stomach.
"I care about you," I said.
"As much as you could care about anything," she admitted.  "But you—I mean, sometimes you're fine, Cygnus, sometimes you're wonderful to be around but whenever anything gets the least bit intense you just go away and leave this, this battle computer running your body and I just can't deal with it any more..."
I stared at the butterfly on the back of her hand.  Its wings flexed and folded, lazy and iridescent.  I wondered how many of those tattoos she had; I'd seen five of them on different body parts, albeit only one at a time.  I thought about asking her, but this didn't seem like the right moment.
"You can be so—so brutal sometimes," she was saying.  "I know you don't mean to be, but...  I don't know.  Maybe I'm your pressure-release valve, or something.  Maybe you have to submerge yourself so much on the job that everything just, just builds up and you need some kind of punching bag.  Maybe that's why you say the things you do."
She was waiting for me to say something now.  "I've been honest," I said.
"Yeah.  Pathologically.  Have you ever had a negative thought that you haven't said out loud?"  Her voice trembled but her eyes—for once— stayed dry.  "I guess it's as much my fault as yours.  Maybe more.  I could tell you were—disconnected, from the day we met.  I guess on some level I always saw it coming."
"Why even try, then?  If you knew we were just going to crash and burn like this?"
"Oh, Cygnus.  Aren't you the one who says that everyone crashes and burns eventually?  Aren't you the one who says it never lasts?"
Mom and Dad lasted.  Longer than this, anyway.  
I frowned, astonished that I'd even let the thought form in my head.  Chelse read the silence as a wounded one.  "I guess—maybe I thought I could help, you know?  Help fix whatever made you so—so angry all the time."
The butterfly was starting to fade.  I'd never seen that happen before.
"Do you understand what I'm saying?" she asked.
"Sure.  I'm a fixer-upper." 
"Siri, you wouldn't even get a tweak when I offered.  You were so scared of being manipulated you wouldn't even try a basic cascade.  You're the one guy I've met who might be truly, eternally unfixable.  I dunno.  Maybe that's even something to be proud of."
I opened my mouth, and closed it.
She gave me a sad smile.  "Nothing, Siri?  Nothing at all?  There was a time you always knew exactly what to say."  She looked back at some earlier version of me. "Now I wonder if you ever actually meant any of it."
"That's not fair."
"No."  She pursed her lips.  "No, it isn't.  That's not really what I'm trying to say.  I guess...it's not so much that you don't mean any of it.  It's more like you don't know what any of it means."
The color was gone from the wings. The butterfly was a delicate charcoal dusting, almost motionless.
"I'll do it now," I said.  "I'll get the tweaks.  If it's that important to you.  I'll do it now."
"It's too late, Siri.  I'm used up."
Maybe she wanted me to call her back.  All these words ending in question marks, all these significant silences.  Maybe she was giving me the opportunity to plead my case, to beg for another chance.  Maybe she wanted a reason to change her mind.
I could have tried.  Please don't, I could have said.  I'm begging you.  I never meant to drive you away completely, just a little, just to a safer distance.   Please.  In thirty long years the only time I haven't felt worthless was when we were together.  
But when I looked up again the butterfly was gone and so was she, taking all baggage with her.  She carried doubt, and guilt for having led me on.  She left believing that our incompatibility was no one's fault, that she'd tried as hard as she could, even that I had under the tragic weight of all my issues.  She left, and maybe she didn't even blame me, and I never even knew who'd made that final decision.
I was good at what I did.  I was so damned good, I did it without even meaning to.

*

"My God!  Did you hear that!?"
Susan James bounced around the drum like a pronking wildebeest in the half-gravity.  I could see the whites of her eyes from ninety degrees away.  "Check your feeds! Check your feeds!  The pens!"
I checked.  One scrambler afloat; the other still jammed into its corner.
James landed at my side with a two-footed thump, wobbling for balance.  "Turn the sound up!"
The hissing of the air conditioners. The clank of distant machinery echoing along the spine; Theseus' usual intestinal rumblings.  Nothing else.
"Okay, they're not doing it now."  James brought up a splitscreen window and threw it into reverse.  "There," she pronounced, replaying the record with the audio cranked and filtered.
In the right side of the window, the floating scrambler had drifted so that the tip of one outstretched arm brushed against the wall that adjoined the other pen.  In the left side, the huddled scrambler remained unmoving.
I thought I heard something.  Just for an instant: the brief buzz of an insect, perhaps, if the nearest insect hadn't been five trillion kilometers away. 
"Replay that.  Slow it down."
A buzz, definitely.  A vibration.
"Way down."
A click train, squirted from a dolphin's forehead.  Farting lips.
"No, let me."  James bulled into Cunningham's headspace and yanked the slider to the left.
Tick tick...tick...tick tick tick...tick...tick tick tick...
Dopplered down near absolute zero, it went on for almost a minute.  Total elapsed real time was about half a second.
Cunningham zoomed the splitscreen.  The huddled scrambler had remained motionless, except for the rippling of its cuticle and the undulation of its free arms.  But before I'd only seen eight arms—and now I could make out the bony spur of a ninth peeking from behind the central mass.  A ninth arm, curled up and hidden from view, tick tick ticking while another creature casually leaned against the other side of the wall...
Now, there was nothing.  The floating scrambler had drifted aimlessly back to the center of its enclosure.
James's eyes shone.  "We've got to check the rest of—"
But Theseus had been watching, and was way ahead of us.  It had already searched the archives and served up the results:  three similar exchanges over two days, ranging in duration from a tenth of a second to almost two.
"They're talking," James said.
Cunningham shrugged, a forgotten cigarette burning down between his fingers.  "So do a lot of things.  And at that rate of exchange they're not exactly doing calculus.  You could get as much information out of a dancing honeybee."
"That's nonsense and you know it, Robert."
"What I know is that—"
"Honeybees don't deliberately hide what they're saying.  Honeybees don't develop whole new modes of communication configured specifically to confound observers.  That's flexible, Robert.  That's intelligent."
"And what if it is, hmm?  Forget for a moment the inconvenient fact that these things don't even have brains.  I really don't think you've thought this through."
"Of course I have."
"Indeed?  Then what are you so happy about?  Don't you know what this means?"
Sudden prickling on the back of my neck.  I looked around; I looked up.  Jukka Sarasti had appeared in the center of the drum, eyes gleaming, teeth bared, watching us.
Cunningham followed my gaze, and nodded.  "I'd wager it does..."

*

There was no way to learn what they'd whispered across that wall.  We could recover the audio easily enough, parse every tick and tap they'd exchanged, but you can't decipher a code without some idea of content.  We had patterns of sound that could have meant anything.  We had creatures whose grammar and syntax—if their mode of communication even contained such attributes—were unknown and perhaps unknowable.  We had creatures smart enough to talk, and smart enough to hide that fact.  No matter how much we wanted to learn, they were obviously unwilling to teach us.
Not without—how had I put it?— negative reinforcement.
It was Jukka Sarasti who made the decision.  We did it on his orders, as we did everything else.  But after the word had come down— after Sarasti had disappeared in the night and Bates had retreated down the spine and Robert Cunningham had returned to his studies at the back of the drum—I was the one Susan James was left with.  The first to speak the vile thought aloud, the official witness to posterity.  I was the one she looked at, and looked away from, her surfaces hard and refractory.
And then she started.

*

This is how you break down the wall:
Start with two beings.  They can be human if you like, but that's hardly a prerequisite.  All that matters is that they be know how to talk among themselves.
Separate them.  Let them see each other, let them speak.  Perhaps a window between their cages.  Perhaps an audio feed.  Let them practice the art of conversation in their own chosen way.
Hurt them.
It may take a while to figure out how.  Some may shrink from fire, others from toxic gas or liquid.  Some creatures may be invulnerable to blowtorches and grenades, but shriek in terror at the threat of ultrasonic sound.  You have to experiment; and when you discover just the right stimulus, the optimum balance between pain and injury, you must inflict it without the remorse.  
You leave them an escape hatch, of course.  That's the very point of the exercise: give one of your subjects the means to end the pain, but give the other the information required to use it.  To one you might present a single shape, while showing the other a whole selection.  The pain will stop and when the being with the menu chooses the item its partner has seen.  So let the games begin.  Watch your subjects squirm.  If—when—they trip the off switch, you'll know at least some of the information they exchanged; and if you record everything that passed between them, you'll start to get some idea of how they exchanged it.
When they solve one puzzle, give them a new one.  Mix things up.  Switch their roles.  See how they do at circles versus squares.  Try them out on factorials and Fibonnaccis.  Continue until Rosetta Stone results.
This is how you communicate with a fellow intelligence:  you hurt it, and keep on hurting it, until you can distinguish the speech from the screams.
Susan James—congenital optimist, high priestess of the Church of the Healing Word, was best qualified to design and execute the protocols.  Now, at her command, the scramblers writhed.  They pulled themselves around their cages in elliptical loops, desperately seeking any small corner free of stimulus.  James had piped the feed into ConSensus, although there was no mission-critical reason for Theseus' whole crew to bear witness to the interrogation.
"Let them block it at their ends," she said quietly, "If they want to."
For all his reluctance to accept that these were beings, intelligent and aware, Cunningham had named the prisoners.  Stretch tended to float spread-eagled; Clench was the balled-up corner-hugger.  Susan, playing her own part in this perverse role-reversal, had simply numbered them One and Two.  It wasn't that Cunningham's choices were too cheesy for her to stomach, or that she objected to slave names on principal.  She'd just fallen back on the oldest trick in the Torturer's Handbook, the one that lets you go home to your family after work, and play with your children, and sleep at night:  never humanize your victims.
It shouldn't have been such an issue when dealing with methane-breathing medusae.  I guess every little bit helped.
Biotelemetry danced across the headspace beside each alien, luminous annotations shuddering through thin air.  I had no idea what constituted normal readings for these creatures, but I couldn't imagine those jagged spikes passing for anything but bad news.  The creatures themselves seethed subtly with fine mosaics in blue and gray, fluid patterns rippling across their cuticles.  Perhaps it was a reflexive reaction to the microwaves; for all we knew it was a mating display.
More likely they were screaming.
James killed the microwaves.  In the left-hand enclosure, a yellow square dimmed; in the right, an identical icon nested among others had never lit.  
The pigment flowed faster in the wake of the onslaught; the arms slowed but didn't stop.  They swept back and forth like listless, skeletal eels.
"Baseline exposure.  Five seconds, two hundred fifty Watts."  She spoke for the record.  Another affectation; Theseus recorded every breath on board, every trickle of current to five decimal places.
"Repeat."
The icon lit up.  More tile patterns, flash-flooding across alien skin.  But this time, neither alien moved from where it was.  Their arms continued to squirm slightly, a torqued trembling variation on the undulation they effected at rest.  The telemetry was as harsh as ever, though.
They learned helplessness fast enough, I reflected.
I glanced at Susan.  "Are you going to do this all yourself?"
Her eyes were bright and wet as she killed the current.  Clench's icon dimmed.  Stretch's remained dormant.
I cleared my throat.  "I mean—"
"Who else is going to do this, Siri?  Jukka?  You?"
"The rest of the Gang.  Sascha could—"
"Sascha?"  She stared at me.  "Siri, I created them. Do you think I did that so I could hide behind them when—so I could force them to do things like this?"  She shook her head.  "I'm not bringing them out.  Not for this.  I wouldn't do that to my worst enemy."
She turned away from me.  There were drugs she could have taken, neuroinhibitors to wash away the guilt, short-circuit it right down in the molecules.  Sarasti had offered them up as if he were tempting some solitary messiah in the desert.  James had refused him, and would not say why.
"Repeat,"  she said.
The current flickered on, then off.
"Repeat," she said again.
Not a twitch.
I pointed.  "I see it," she said.
Clench had pressed the tip of one arm against the touchpad.  The icon there glowed like a candle flame.

*

Six and a half minutes later they'd graduated from yellow squares to time-lapsed four-dimensional polyhedrons.  It took them as long to distinguish between two twenty-six-faceted shifting solids—differing by one facet in a single frame—as it took them to tell the difference between a yellow square and a red triangle.  Intricate patterns played across their surfaces the whole time, dynamic needlepoint mosaics flickering almost too fast to see.
"Fuck," James whispered.
"Could be splinter skills."  Cunningham had joined us in ConSensus, although his body remained halfway around BioMed.
"Splinter skills," she repeated dully.
"Savantism.  Hyperperformance at one kind of calculation doesn't necessarily connote high intelligence."
"I know what splinter skills are, Robert.  I just think you're wrong."
"Prove it."
So she gave up on geometry and told the scramblers that one plus one equaled two.  Evidently they knew that already:  ten minutes later they were predicting ten-digit prime numbers on demand.
She showed them a sequence of two-dimensional shapes; they picked the next one in the series from a menu of subtly-different alternatives.  She denied them multiple choice, showed them the beginning of a whole new sequence and taught them to draw on the touch-sensitive interface with the tips of their arms.  They finished that series in precise freehand, rendered a chain of logical descendants ending with a figure that led inexorably back to the starting point.
"These aren't drones." James's voice caught in her throat.
"This is all just crunching," Cunningham said.  "Millions of computer programs do it without ever waking up."
"They're intelligent, Robert.  They're smarter than us.  Maybe they're smarter than Jukka.  And we're—why can't you just admit it?"
I could see it all over her:  Isaac would have admitted it.
"Because they don't have the circuitry," Cunningham insisted.  "How could—"
"I don't know how!" she cried.  "That's your job!  All I know is that I'm torturing beings that can think rings around us..."
"Not for much longer, at least.  Once you figure out the language—"
She shook her head.  "Robert, I haven't a clue about the language.  We've been at it for—for hours, haven't we?  The Gang's all here, language databases four thousand years thick, all the latest linguistic algorithms.  And we know exactly what they're saying, we're watching every possible way they could be saying it.  Right down to the Angstrom."
"Precisely.  So—"
"I've got nothing.  I know they're talking through pigment mosaics.  There might even be something in the way they move those bristles.  But I can't find the pattern, I can't even follow how they count, much less tell them I'm...sorry..."
Nobody spoke for a while.  Bates watched us from the galley on our ceiling, but made no attempt to join the proceedings.  On ConSensus the reprieved scramblers floated in their cages like multiarmed martyrs.
"Well," Cunningham said at last, "since this seems to be the day for bad news, here's mine.  They're dying."
James put her face in her hand.
"It's not your interrogation, for whatever that's worth," the biologist continued.  "As far as I can determine, some of their metabolic pathways are just missing."
"Obviously you just haven't found them yet."  That was Bates, speaking up from across the drum.
"No," Cunningham said, slowly and distinctly, "obviously those parts aren't available to the organism.  Because they're falling apart pretty much the same way you'd expect one of us to, if—if all the mitotic spindles in our cells just vanished out of the cytoplasm, for example.  As far as I can tell they started deteriorating the moment we took them off Rorschach."
Susan looked up.  "Are you saying they left part of their biochemistry behind?"
"Some essential nutrient?" Bates suggested.  "They're not eating—"
"Yes to the linguist.  No to the major."  Cunningham fell silent;  I glanced across the drum to see him sucking on a cigarette.  "I think a lot of the cellular processes in these things are mediated externally.  I think the reason I can't find any genes in my biopsies is because they don't have any."
"So what do they have instead?" Bates asked.
"Turing morphogens."
Blank looks, subtitling looks.  Cunningham explained anyway:  "A lot of biology doesn't use genes.  Sunflowers look the way they do because of purely physical buckling stress.   You get Fibonacci sequences and Golden ratios everywhere in nature, and there's no gene that codes for them; it's all just mechanical interactions.  Take a developing embryo—the genes say start growing or stop growing, but the number of digits and vertebrae result from the mechanics of cells bumping against other cells.  Those mitotic spindles I mentioned?  Absolutely essential for replication in every eukaryotic cell, and they accrete like crystals without any genetic involvement.  You'd be surprised how much of life is like that."
"But you still need genes," Bates protested, walking around to join us.
"Genes just establish the starting conditions to enable the process.  The structure that proliferates afterwards doesn't need specific instructions.  It's classic emergent complexity.  We've known about it for over a century."  Another drag on the stick.  "Or even longer.  Darwin cited honeycomb way back in the eighteen hundreds."
"Honeycomb," Bates repeated.
"Perfect hexagonal tubes in a packed array.  Bees are hardwired to lay them down, but how does an insect know enough geometry to lay down a precise hexagon?  It doesn't.  It's programmed to chew up wax and spit it out while turning on its axis, and that generates a circle.  Put a bunch of bees on the same surface, chewing side-by-side, and the circles abut against each other—deform each other into hexagons, which just happen to be more efficient for close packing anyway."
Bates pounced:  "But the bees are programmed.  Genetically."
"You misunderstand.  Scramblers are the honeycomb."
"Rorschach is the bees," James murmured.
Cunningham nodded.  "Rorschach is the bees.  And I don't think Rorschach's magnetic fields are counterintrusion mechanisms at all.  I think they're part of the life-support system.  I think they mediate and regulate a good chunk of scrambler metabolism.  What we've got back in the hold is a couple of creatures dragged out of their element and holding their breath.  And they can't hold it forever."
"How long?" James asked.
"How should I know?  If I'm right, I'm not even dealing with complete organisms here."
"Guess," Bates said.
He shrugged.  "A few days.  Maybe." 
"That which does not kill us, makes us stranger."
—Trevor Goodchild

"You still don't vote," Sarasti said.
We would not be releasing the prisoners.  Too risky.  Out here in the endless wastelands of the Oort there was no room for live and let live.  Never mind what the Other has done, or what it hasn't:  think of what it could do, if it were just a little stronger.  Think of what it might have done, if we'd arrived as late as we were supposed to.  You look at Rorschach and perhaps you see an embryo or a developing child, alien beyond comprehension perhaps but not guilty, not by default.  But what if those are the wrong eyes?  What if you should be seeing an omnipotent murdering God, a planet-killer, not yet finished?  Vulnerable only now, and for a little longer?
There was no vampire opacity to that logic, no multidimensional black boxes for humans to shrug at and throw up their hands.  There was no excuse for the failure to find fault with Sarasti's reasoning, beyond the fact that his reasoning was without fault.  That made it worse.  The others, I knew, would rather have had to take something on faith.  
But Sarasti had an alternative to capture-release, one he evidently considered much safer.  It took an act of faith to accept that reasoning, at least; by any sane measure it verged on suicide. 
Now Theseus gave birth by Caesarian.  These progeny were far too massive to fit through the canal at the end of the spine.  The ship shat them as if constipated, directly into the hold:  great monstrous things, bristling with muzzles and antennae.  Each stood three or four times my height, a pair of massive rust-colored cubes, every surface infested with topography.  Armor plating would hide most of it prior to deployment, of course.  Ribbons of piping and conduit, ammunition reservoirs and shark-toothed rows of radiator fins— all to disappear beneath smooth reflective shielding.  Only a few island landmarks would rise above that surface:  comm ports, thrust nozzles, targeting arrays.  And gun ports, of course.  These things spat fire and brimstone from a half-dozen mouths apiece.
But for the time being they were just giant mechanical fetuses, half-extruded, their planes and angles a high-contrast jigsaw of light and shadow in the harsh white glow of the hold's floodlamps.
I turned from the port.  "That's got to take our substrate stockpiles down a bit."
"Shielding the carapace was worse."  Bates monitored construction through a dedicated flatscreen built right into the Fab bulkhead.  Practicing, perhaps; we'd be losing our inlays as soon as the orbit changed.  "We're tapping out, though. Might have to grab one of the local rocks before long."
"Huh."  I looked back into the hold.  "You think they're necessary?"
"Doesn't matter what I think.  You're a bright guy, Siri.  Why can't you figure that out?"
"It matters to me.  That means it matters to Earth."
Which might mean something, if Earth was calling the shots.  Some subtext was legible no matter how deep in the system you were. 
I tacked to port:  "How about Sarasti and the Captain, then?  Any thoughts?"
"You're usually a bit more subtle."
That much was true.  "It's just, you know Susan was the one that caught Stretch and Clench tapping back and forth, right?"
Bates winced at the names.  "So?"
"Well, some might think it odd that Theseus wouldn't have seen it first.  Since quantum computers are supposed to be so proficient at pattern-matching."
"Sarasti took the quantum modules offline.  The onboard's been running in classical mode since before we even made orbit."
"Why?"
"Noisy environment.  Too much risk of decoherence.  Quantum computers are finicky things."
"Surely the onboard's shielded.  Theseus is shielded."
Bates nodded.  "As much as feasible.  But perfect shielding is perfect blindness, and this is not the kind of neighborhood where you want to keep your eyes closed."
Actually, it was.  But I took her point.
I took her other point, too, the one she didn't speak aloud:  And you missed it.  Something  sitting right there in ConSensus for anyone to see.  Top-of-the-line synthesist like you.
"Sarasti knows what he's doing, I guess," I admitted, endlessly aware that he might be listening.  "He hasn't been wrong yet, as far as we know."
"As far as we can know," Bates said.  
"If you could second-guess a vampire, you wouldn't need a vampire,"  I remembered.
She smiled faintly.  "Isaac was a good man.  You can't always believe the PR, though."
"You don't buy it?" I asked, but she was already thinking she'd said too much.  I threw out a hook baited with just the right mix of skepticism and deference:  "Sarasti did know where those scramblers would be.  Nailed it almost the meter, out of that whole maze."
"I suppose that might have taken some kind of superhuman logic," she admitted, thinking I was so fucking dumb she couldn't believe it.
"What?" I said.
Bates shrugged.  "Or maybe he just realized that since Rorschach was growing its own crew, we'd run into more every time we went in.  No matter where we landed."
ConSensus bleeped into my silence.  "Orbital maneuvers starting in five,"  Sarasti announced.  "Inlays and wireless prosthetics offline in ninety.  That's all."  
Bates shut down the display.  "I'm going to ride this out in the bridge.  Illusion of control and all that.  You?"
"My tent, I think."
She nodded, and braced to jump, and hesitated.
"By the way," she told me, "yes."
"Sorry?"
"You asked if I thought the emplacements were necessary.  Right now I think we need all the protection we can get."
"So you think that Rorschach might—"
"Hey, it already killed me once. "
She wasn't talking about radiation.
I nodded carefully.  "That must have been…"
"Like nothing at all.  You couldn't possibly imagine." Bates took a breath and let it out.
"Maybe you don't have to," she added, and sailed away up the spine.

*

Cunningham and the Gang in BioMed, thirty degrees of arc between them. Each poked their captives in their own way.  Susan James stabbed indifferently at a keypad painted across her desktop.  Windows to either side looked in on Stretch and Clench.
Cookie-cutter shapes scrolled across the desk as James typed:  circles, triskelions, a quartet of parallel lines.  Some of them pulsed like abstract little hearts.  In his distant pen, Stretch reached out one fraying tentacle and tapped something in turn.
"Any progress?"
She sighed and shook her head.  "I've given up trying to understand their language.  I'm settling for a pidgin."  She tapped an icon.  Clench vanished from his window; a hieroglyphic flowchart sprang up in his place.  Half the symbols wriggled or pulsed, endlessly repetitive, a riot of dancing doodles.  Others just sat there.  
"Iconic base." James waved vaguely at the display.  "Subject-Verb phrases render as animated versions of noun icons.  They're radially symmetrical, so I array modifiers in a circular pattern around the central subject.  Maybe that comes naturally to them."
A new circle of glyphs appeared beneath James's—Stretch's reply, presumably.  But something in the system didn't like what it saw.  Icons flared in a separate window:  a luminous counter flashed 500 WATTS, and held steady.  On the screen, Stretch writhed.  It reached out with squirming backbone-arms and stabbed repeatedly at its touchpad.
James looked away.
New glyphs appeared.  500 WATTS retreated to zero.  Stretch returned to its holding pattern; the spikes and jags of its telemetry smoothed.
James let out her breath.   "What happened?" I asked.
"Wrong answer."  She tapped into Stretch's feed, showed me the display that had tripped it up.  A pyramid, a star, simplified representations of a scrambler and of Rorschach rotated on the board. 
"It was stupid, it was just a—a warm-up exercise, really.  I asked it to name the objects in the window." She laughed softly and without humor.  "That's the thing about functional languages, you know.  If you can't point at it, you can't talk about it."
"And what did it say?"
She pointed at Stretch's first spiral:  "Polyhedron star Rorschach are present."
"It missed the scrambler."
"Got it right the second time.  Still, stupid mistake for something that can think rings around a vampire, isn't it?"  Susan swallowed.  "I guess even scramblers slip up when they're dying."
I didn't know what to say.  Behind me, barely audible, Cunningham muttered some two-stroke mantra to himself in an endless loop.
"Jukka says—"  Susan stopped, began again:  "You know that blindsight we get sometimes, in Rorschach?"
I nodded, and wondered what Jukka had said.
"Apparently the same thing can happen to the other senses too," she told me.  "You can have blindtouch, and blindsmell, and blindhearing..."
"That would be deafness."
She shook her head.  "But it isn't really, is it?  Any more than blindsight is really blindness.  Something in your head is still taking it all in.  Something in the brain is still seeing, and hearing, even if you're not—aware of it.  Unless someone forces you to guess, or there's some threat.  You just get a really strong feeling you should move out of the way, and five seconds later a bus drives over the spot you were standing.  You knew it was coming, somehow.  You just don't know how you knew."
"It's wild," I agreed.
"These scramblers—they know the answers, Siri.  They're intelligent, we know they are.  But it's almost as though they don't know they know, unless you hurt them.  As if they've got blindsight spread over every sense."
I tried to imagine it:  life without sensation, without any active awareness of one's environment.  I tried to imagine existing like that without going mad.  "Do you think that's possible?"
"I don't know.  It's just a—a metaphor, I guess."  She didn't believe that.  Or she didn't know.  Or she didn't want me to know.  
I should have been able to tell.  She should have been clear.
"At first I just thought they were resisting," she said, "but why would they?"  She turned bright, begging eyes on me, pleading for an answer.  
I didn't have one.  I didn't have a clue.  I turned away from Susan James, only to find myself facing Robert Cunningham:  Cunningham the mutterer, fingers tapping against tabletop interfaces, inner eyes blinded, vision limited now to the pictures ConSensus sketched in airspace or threw against flat surfaces for everyone to see.  His face remained as empty of feeling as it had ever been; the rest of his body twitched like a bug in a spiderweb.
He might as well have been.  We all might.   Rorschach loomed barely nine kilometers away now, so near it might have eclipsed Ben itself if I'd been brave enough to look outside.  We had closed to this insane proximity and parked.   Out there, Rorschach grew like a live thing.  In there, live things grew, budded like jellyfish from some demonic mechanical substrate.  Those lethal, vacant corridors we'd crept along, frightened of the shadows planted in our heads—they were probably filling with scramblers right now.  All those hundreds of kilometers of twisted tunnels and passages and chambers.  Filling with an army.
This was Sarasti's safer alternative.  This was the path we'd followed because it would have been too dangerous to release the prisoners.   We were so deep inside the bow shock that we'd had to shut down our internal augments; while Rorschach's magnetosphere was orders of magnitude weaker here than within the structure itself, who knew if the alien might find us too tempting a target—or too great a threat—at this range?  Who knew when it might choose to plunge some invisible spike through Theseus's heart?
Any pulse that could penetrate the ship's shielding would doubtless fry Theseus's nervous system as well as the wiring in our heads.  I supposed that five people in a dead ship would have a marginally greater chance of survival if their brains weren't sparking in the bargain, but I doubted that such a difference would make much difference.  Sarasti had obviously figured the odds differently.  He'd even shut down the antiEuclidean pump in his own head, resorted to manual injections to keep himself from short-circuiting.
Stretch and Clench were even closer to Rorschach than we were.  Cunningham's lab had been kicked free of the ship; it floated now just a few kilometers from the artefact's outermost spires, deep within the folds of its magnetic field.  If the scramblers needed radioactive magnetite to function, this was the most they were going to get:  a taste of the fields, but not of freedom.  The lab's shielding was being dynamically fine-tuned to balance medical necessity against tactical risk, as best the data allowed.  The structure floated in the watchful crosshairs of our newborn gun emplacements, strategically positioned to either side.  Those emplacements could destroy the hab in an instant.  They could probably destroy anything approaching it as well.
They couldn't destroy Rorschach, of course.  Maybe nothing could.
Covert to invulnerable.  As far as we knew that hadn't happened yet.  Presumably Theseus could still do something about the artefact accreting off our bow, assuming we could decide which thing to do.  Sarasti wasn't talking.  In fact,  I couldn't remember the last time any of us had even seen the vampire in the flesh.  For several shifts now he had confined himself to his tent, speaking only through ConSensus.
Everyone was on edge, and the transient had gone quiet.
Cunningham muttered to himself, stabbed at unfamiliar controls with unpracticed fingers, cursed his own clumsiness.  Stimulus and response flowed through lasers across six kilometers of ionized vacuum.  The ever-present nicotine stick hung from one corner of his mouth for want of a free hand.  Every now and then flecks of ash broke free and drifted obliquely towards the ventilators.
He spoke before I could.  "It's all in ConSensus."  When I didn't leave he relented, but wouldn't look at me:   "Magnetite flecks lined up as soon as they got past the wavefront, more or less.  Membranes started to fix themselves.  They're not failing as fast.  But it's Rorschach's internal environment that will be optimized for scrambler metabolism.  Out here, I think the most we can do is slow the rate of dying."
"That's something, at least."
Cunningham grunted.  "Some of the pieces are coming together.  Others—their nerves are frayed, for no good reason.  Literally.  Signal leakage along the cables."
"Because of their deterioration?" I guessed.
"And I can't get the Arrhenius equation to balance, there's all this nonlinearity at low temperatures.  The preexponential value's completely fucked up.  It's almost as though temperature doesn't matter, and —shit—"
Some critical value had exceeded a confidence limit on one of his displays.  He glanced up the drum, raised his voice:  "Need another biopsy, Susan.  Anywhere central."
"What—oh.  Just a second."  She shook her head and tapped off a brief spiral of icons, as listless as the captives she commanded.  On one of Cunningham's windows Stretch viewed her input with its marvelous sighted skin.   It floated unresponsive for a moment.  Then it folded back the arms facing one wall, opening a clear path for Cunningham's teleops.  
He called two of them from their burrows like prehensile serpents.  The first wielded a clinical core-sampler; the second wielded the threat of violence in case of foolish resistance.  It was hardly necessary.  Blindsighted or not, scramblers were fast learners.  Stretch exposed its belly like a victim resigned to imminent rape.  Cunningham fumbled; the teleops bumped together, briefly entangled.  He cursed and tried again, every move shouting frustration.  His extended phenotype had been amputated; once the very ghost in the machine, now he was just another guy punching buttons, and—  
—and suddenly, something clicked.  Cunningham's facades swirled to translucency before my eyes.  Suddenly, I could almost imagine him.
He got it right the second time.  The tip of his machine shot out like a striking snake and darted back again, almost too fast to see.  Waves of color flushed from Stretch's injury like ripples chased across still water by a falling stone.
Cunningham must have thought he saw something in my face.  "It helps if you try not to think of them as people," he said.  And for the very first time I could read the subtext, as clear and sharp as broken glass:  
Of course, you don't think of anyone that way...

*

Cunningham didn't like to be played.
No one does.  But most people don't think that's what I'm doing.  They don't know how much their bodies betray when they close their mouths.  When they speak aloud, it's because they want to confide; when they don't, they think they're keeping their opinions to themselves.  I watch them so closely, customize each word so that no system ever feels used— and yet for some reason, that didn't work with Robert Cunningham.
I think I was modeling the wrong system.
Imagine you are a synthesist.  You deal in the behavior of systems at their surfaces, infer the machinery beneath from its reflections above.  That is the secret of your success:  you understand the system by understanding the boundaries that contain it.
Now imagine you encounter someone who has ripped a hole in those boundaries and bled beyond them.
Robert Cunningham's flesh could not contain him.  His duties pulled him beyond the meat sack; here in the Oort, his topology rambled all over the ship.  That was true of all of us, to some extent; Bates and her drones, Sarasti and his limbic link—even the ConSensus inlays in our heads diffused us a bit, spread us just slightly beyond the confines of our own bodies.  But Bates only ran her drones; she never inhabited them.  The Gang of Four may have run multiple systems on a single motherboard, but each had its own distinct topology and they only surfaced one at a time.  And Sarasti—
Well, Sarasti was a whole different story, as it turned out.
Cunningham didn't just operate his remotes; he escaped into them, wore them like a secret identity to hide the feeble Human baseline within.  He had sacrificed half of his neocortex for the chance to see x-rays and taste the shapes hiding in cell membranes, he had butchered one body to become a fleeting tenant of many.  Pieces of him hid in the sensors and manipulators that lined the scrambler's cages;  I might have gleaned vital cues from every piece of equipment in the subdrum if I'd ever thought to look.  Cunningham was a topological jigsaw like everyone else, but half his pieces were hidden in machinery.  My model was incomplete.
I don't think he ever aspired to such a state.  Looking back, I see radiant self-loathing on every remembered surface.  But there in the waning years of the twenty-first century, the only alternative he could see was the life of a parasite.  Cunningham merely chose the lesser evil.  
Now, even that was denied him.   Sarasti's orders had severed him from his own sensorium.  He no longer felt the data in his gut; he had to interpret it,  step by laborious step, through screens and graphs that reduced perception to flat empty shorthand.  Here was a system traumatized by multiple amputations.  Here was a system with its eyes and ears and tongue cut out, forced to stumble and feel its way around things it had once inhabited, right down in the bone.  Suddenly there was nowhere else to hide, and all those far-flung pieces of Robert Cunningham tumbled back into his flesh where I could see them at last.
It had been my mistake, all along.  I'd been so focused on modelling other systems that I'd forgotten about the one doing the modelling.  Bad eyes are only one bane of clear vision:  bad assumptions can be just as blinding, and it wasn't enough to imagine I was Robert Cunningham.
I had to imagine I was Siri Keeton as well.

*

Of course, that only raises another question.  If my guess about Cunningham was right, why did my tricks work on Isaac Szpindel?  He was every bit as discontinuous as his replacement.
I didn't think about it much at the time.  Szpindel was gone but the thing that had killed him was still there, hanging right off the bow, a vast swelling enigma that might choose to squash us at any instant.  I was more than a little preoccupied.
Now, though—far too late to do anything about it—I think I might know the answer.
Maybe my tricks didn't work on Isaac either, not really.  Maybe he saw through my manipulations as easily as Cunningham did.  But maybe he just didn't care.  Maybe I could read him because he let me.  Which would mean— I can't find another explanation that fits— that he just liked me, regardless.
I think that might have made him a friend.
"If I can but make the words awake the feeling"
—Ian Anderson, Stand Up

Night shift.  Not a creature was stirring.
Not in Theseus, anyway.  The Gang hid in their tent.  The transient lurked weightless and silent below the surface.  Bates was in the bridge— she more or less lived up there now, vigilant and conscientious, nested in camera angles and tactical overlays.  There was nowhere she could turn without seeing some aspect of the cipher off our starboard bow.  She did what good she could, for the good it would do.
The drum turned quietly, lights dimmed in deference to a diel cycle that a hundred years of tweaks and retrofits hadn't been able to weed from the genes.  I sat alone in the galley, squinting from the inside of a system whose outlines grew increasingly hazy, trying to compile my latest—how had Isaac put it?— postcard to posterity.  Cunningham worked upside-down on the other side of the world.
Except Cunningham wasn't working.  He hadn't even moved for at least four minutes.  I'd assumed he was reciting the Kaddish for Szpindel—ConSensus said he'd be doing it twice daily for the next year, if we lived that long—but now, leaning to see around the spinal bundles in the core, I could read his surfaces as clearly as if I'd been sitting beside him.  He wasn't bored, or distracted, or even deep in thought. 
Robert Cunningham was petrified.
I stood and paced the drum.  Ceiling turned into wall; wall into floor.  I was close enough to hear his incessant soft muttering, a single indistinct syllable repeated over and over; then I was close enough to hear what he was saying—
"fuck fuck fuck fuck..."
—and still Cunningham didn't move, although I'd made no attempt to mask my approach.
Finally, when I was almost at his shoulder,  he fell silent.
"You're blind," he said without turning.  "Did you know that?"
"I didn't."
"You.  Me.  Everyone."  He interlocked his fingers and clenched as if in prayer, hard enough to whiten the knuckles.  Only then did I notice:  no cigarette.  
"Vision's mostly a lie anyway," he continued.  "We don't really see anything except a few hi-res degrees where the eye focuses.  Everything else is just peripheral blur, just— light and motion.  Motion draws the focus.  And your eyes jiggle all the time, did you know that, Keeton?  Saccades, they're called.  Blurs the image, the movement's way too fast for the brain to integrate so your eye just—shuts down between pauses.  It only grabs these isolated freeze-frames, but your brain edits out the blanks and stitches an — an illusion of continuity into your head."
He turned to face me.  "And you know what's really amazing?  If something only moves during the gaps, your brain just—ignores it.  It's invisible."
I glanced at his workspace.  The usual splitscreen glowed to one side—realtime images of the scramblers in their pens—but Histology, ten thousand times larger than life, took center stage.  The paradoxical neural architecture of Stretch & Clench glistened on the main window, flensed and labeled and overlaid by circuit diagrams a dozen layers thick.  A dense, annotated forest of alien trunks and brambles.  It looked a little like Rorschach itself.  
I couldn't parse any of it.
"Are you listening, Keeton?  Do you know what I'm saying?"
"You've figured out why I couldn't—you're saying these things can somehow tell when our eyes are offline, and..."
I didn't finish.  It just didn't seem possible.
Cunningham shook his head.  Something that sounded disturbingly like a giggle escaped his mouth.  "I'm saying these things can see your nerves firing from across the room, and integrate that into a crypsis strategy, and then send motor commands to act on that strategy, and then send other commands to stop the motion before your eyes come back online.  All in the time it would take a mammalian nerve impulse to make it halfway from your shoulder to your elbow.  These things are fast, Keeton.  Way faster than we could have guessed even from that high-speed whisper line they were using.  They're bloody superconductors."
It took a conscious effort to keep from frowning.  "Is that even possible?"
"Every nerve impulse generates an electromagnetic field.  That makes it detectable."
"But Rorschach's EM fields are so—I mean, reading the firing of a single optic nerve through all that interference—"
"It's not interference.  The fields are part of them, remember?  That's probably how they do it."
"So they couldn't do that here."
"You're not listening.  The trap you set wouldn't have caught anything like that, not unless it wanted to be caught.  We didn't grab specimens at all.  We grabbed spies."
Stretch and Clench floated in splitscreen before us, arms swaying like undulating backbones.  Cryptic patterns played slowly across their cuticles.
"Supposing it's just— instinct," I suggested.  "Flounders hide against their background pretty well, but they don't think about it."
"Where are they going to get that instinct from, Keeton?  How is it going to evolve?  Saccades are an accidental glitch in mammalian vision.  Where would scramblers have encountered them before now?"  Cunningham shook his head.  "That thing, that thing Amanda's robot fried— it developed that strategy on its own, on the spot.  It improvised."
The word intelligent barely encompassed that kind of improvisation.  But there was something else in Cunningham's face, some deeper distress nested inside what he'd already told me.
"What?" I asked.
"It was stupid," he said.  "The things these creatures can do, it was just dumb."
"How do you mean?"
"Well it didn't work, did it?  Couldn't keep it up in front of more than one or two of us."
Because people's eyes don't flicker in synch, I realized.  Too many witnesses stripped it of cover. 
"—many other things it could have done," Cunningham was saying.  "They could've induced Anton's or, or an agnosia:  then we could have tripped over a whole herd of scramblers and it wouldn't even register in our conscious minds.  Agnosias happen by accident, for God's sake.  If you've got the senses and reflexes to hide between someone's saccades, why stop there?  Why not do something that really works?"
"Why do you think?" I asked, reflexively nondirective.
"I think that first one was—you know it was a juvenile, right?  Maybe it was just inexperienced.  Maybe it was stupid, and it made a bad decision.  I think we're dealing with a species so far beyond us that even their retarded children can rewire our brains on the fly, and I can't tell you how fucking scared that should make you."
I could see it in his topology.  I could hear it in his voice.  His nerveless face remained as calm as a corpse.
"We should just kill them now," he said.
"Well, if they're spies, they can't have learned much.  They've been in those cages the whole time, except—"  for the way up.  They'd been right next to us the whole trip back…
"These things live and breath EM.  Even stunted, even isolated, who knows how much of our tech they could have just read through the walls?"
"You've got to tell Sarasti," I said.
"Oh, Sarasti knows.  Why do you think he wouldn't let them go?"
"He never said anything about—"
"He'd be crazy to fill us in.  He keeps sending you down there, remember?  Do you think for a second he'd tell you what he knows and then set you loose in a labyrinth full of mind-reading minotaurs?  He knows, and he's already got it factored a thousand ways to Sunday."  Keeton's eyes were bright manic points blazing in an expressionless mask.  He raised them to the center of the drum, and didn't raise his voice a decibel. "Isn't that right, Jukka?"
I checked ConSensus for active channels.   "I don't think he's listening, Robert."
Cunningham's mouth moved in something that would have been a pitying smile if the rest of his face had been able to join in.  "He doesn't have to listen, Keeton.  He doesn't have to spy on us.  He just knows."
Ventilators, breathing.  The almost-subliminal hum of bearings in motion.  Then Sarasti's disembodied voice rang forth through the drum.
"Everyone to Commons.  Robert wants to share."

*

Cunningham sat to my right, his plastic face lit from beneath by the conference table.    He stared down into that light, rocking slightly.  His lips went through the ongoing motions of some inaudible incantation.  The Gang sat across from us.  To my left Bates kept one eye on the proceedings and another on intelligence from the front lines.
Sarasti was with us only in spirit.  His place at the head of the table remained empty.  "Tell them," he said.
"We have to get out of h—"
"From the beginning."
Cunningham swallowed and started again.  "Those frayed motor nerves I couldn't figure out, those pointless cross-connections—they're logic gates.  Scramblers time-share.  Their sensory and motor plexii double as associative neurons during idle time, so every part of the system can be used for cognition when it isn't otherwise engaged.   Nothing like it ever evolved on Earth.  It means they can do a great deal of processing without a lot of dedicated associative mass, even for an individual."
"So peripheral nerves can think?"  Bates frowned.   "Can they remember?"
"Certainly.  At least, I don't see why not."  Cunningham pulled a cigarette from his pocket.
"So when they tore that scrambler apart—"
"Not civil war.  Data dump.  Passing information about us, most likely."
"Pretty radical way to carry on a conversation," Bates remarked.
"It wouldn't be their first choice.  I think each scrambler acts as a node in a distributed network, when they're in Rorschach at least.  But those fields would be configured down to the Angstrom, and when we go in with our tech and our shielding and blowing holes in their conductors—we bollocks up the network.  Jam the local signal.  So they resort to a sneakernet."
He had not lit his cigarette.  He rolled the filtered end between thumb and forefinger.  His tongue flickered between his lips like a worm behind a mask.
Hidden in his tent, Sarasti took up the slack.  "Scramblers also use Rorschach's EM for metabolic processes.  Some pathways achieve proton transfer via heavy-atom tunneling.  Perhaps the ambient radiation acts as a catalyst."
"Tunneling?" Susan said.  "As in quantum?"
Cunningham nodded.  "Which also explains your shielding problems.  Partly, at least."
"But is that even possible?  I mean, I thought those kind of effects only showed up under cryonic—"
"Forget this,"  Cunningham blurted.  "We can debate the biochemistry later, if we're still alive."
"What do we debate instead, Robert?" Sarasti said smoothly.
"For starters, the dumbest of these things can look into your head and see what parts of your visual cortex are lighting up.  And if there's a difference between that and mind-reading, it's not much of one."
"As long as we stay out of Rorschach—"
"That ship has sailed.  You people have already been there. Repeatedly.  Who knows what you already did down there for no better reason than because Rorschach made you?"
"Wait a second," Bates objected.  "None of us were puppets down there.  We hallucinated and we went blind and—and crazy even, but we were never possessed."
Cunningham looked at her and snorted.  "You think you'd be able to fight the strings?  You think you'd even feel them?  I could apply a transcranial magnet to your head right now and you'd raise your middle finger or wiggle your toes or kick Siri here in the sack and then swear on your sainted mother's grave that you only did it because you wanted to.  You'd dance like a puppet and all the time swear you were doing it of your own free will, and that's just me, that's just some borderline OCD with a couple of magnets and an MRI helmet."  He waved at the vast unknowable void beyond the bulkhead.  Shreds of mangled cigarette floated sideways in front of him.   "Do you want to guess what that can do?  For all we know we've already given them Theseus' technical specs, warned them about the Icarus array, and then just decided of our own free will to forget it all."
"We can cause those effects," Sarasti said coolly.  "As you say.  Strokes cause them.  Tumors.  Random accidents."
"Random?  Those were experiments, people!  That was vivisection!  They let you in so they could take you apart and see what made you tick and you never even knew it."
"So what?" the vampire snapped invisibly.  Something cold and hungry had edged into his voice.  Human topologies shivered around the table, skittish. 
"There's a blind spot in the center of your visual field," Sarasti pointed out.  "You can't see it.  You can't see the saccades in your visual timestream.  Just two of the tricks you know about.  Many others."
Cunningham was nodding.  "That's my whole point.  Rorschach could be—"
"Not talking about case studies.  Brains are survival engines, not truth detectors.  If self-deception promotes fitness, the brain lies.  Stops noticing— irrelevant things.  Truth never matters.  Only fitness.  By now you don't experience the world as it exists at all.  You experience a simulation built from assumptions.  Shortcuts.  Lies.  Whole species is agnosiac by default.  Rorschach does nothing to you that you don't already do to yourselves."
Nobody spoke.  It was several silent seconds before I realized what had happened.
Jukka Sarasti had just given us a pep talk.
He could have shut down Cunningham's tirade—could have probably shut down a full-scale mutiny—by just sailing into our midst and baring his teeth.  By looking at us.  But he wasn't trying to frighten us into submission, we were already nervous enough.  And he wasn't trying to educate us either, fight fear with fact; the more facts any sane person gathered about Rorschach, the more fearful they'd become.  Sarasti was only trying to keep us functional, lost in space on the edge of our lives, facing down this monstrous enigma that might destroy us at any instant for any reason.  Sarasti was trying to calm us down:  good meat, nice meat.  He was trying to keep us from falling apart.  There there.
Sarasti was practicing psychology.
I looked around the table.  Bates and Cunningham and the Gang sat still and bloodless.
Sarasti sucked at it.
"We have to get out of here," Cunningham said.  "These things are way beyond us."
"We've shown more aggression than they have,"  James said, but there was no confidence in her voice.
"Rorschach plays those rocks like marbles.  We're sitting in the middle of a shooting gallery.  Any time it feels like—"
"It's still growing.  It's not finished."
"That's supposed to reassure me?"
"All I'm saying is, we don't know,"  James said.  "We could have years yet.  Centuries."
"We have fifteen days," Sarasti announced.
"Oh shit," someone said.  Cunningham, probably.  Maybe Sascha.
For some reason everyone was looking at me.
Fifteen days.  Who knows what had gone into that number?   None of us asked aloud.  Maybe Sarasti, in another fit of inept psychology, had made it up on the spur of the moment.  Or maybe he'd derived it before we'd even reached orbit, held it back against the possibility—only now expired— that he might yet send us back into the labyrinth.  I'd been half blind for half the mission; I didn't know.
But one way or another, we had our Graduation Day.

*

The coffins lay against the rear bulkhead of the crypt—on what would be the floor during those moments when up and down held any meaning.  We'd slept for years on the way out.  We'd had no awareness of time's passage—undead metabolism is far too sluggish even to support dreams—but somehow the body knew when it needed a change.  Not one of us had chosen to sleep in our pods once we'd arrived.  The only times we'd done so had been on pain of death.
But the Gang had taken to coming here ever since Szpindel had died.
His body rested in the pod next to mine.  I coasted into the compartment and turned left without thinking.  Five coffins:  four open and emptied, one sealed.  The mirrored bulkhead opposite doubled their number and the depth of the compartment.
But the Gang wasn't there.
I turned right.  The body of Susan James floated back-to-back with her own reflection, staring at an inverse tableau:  three sealed sarcophagi,  one open.  The ebony plaque set into the retracted lid was dark; the others shone with identical sparse mosaics of blue and green stars.  None of them changed.  There were no scrolling ECGs, no luminous peak-and-valley tracings marked  CARDIO or CNS.  We could wait here for hours, days, and none of those diodes would so much as twinkle.  When you're undead, the emphasis is on the second syllable.
The Gang's topology had said Michelle when I'd first arrived, but it was Susan who spoke now, without turning.  "I never met her."
I followed her gaze to the name tag one of the sealed pods:  Takamatsu.  The other linguist, the other multiple.
"I met everyone else," Susan continued.  "Trained with them.  But I never met my own replacement."
They discouraged it.  What would have been the point?
"If you want to—" I began.
She shook her head.  "Thanks anyway."
"Or any of the others—I can only imagine what Michelle—"
Susan smiled, but there was something cold about it.  "Michelle doesn't really want to talk to you right now, Siri."
"Ah."  I hesitated for a moment, to give anyone else a chance to speak up.  When nobody did, I pushed myself back towards the hatch.  "Well, if any of you change—"
"No.  None of us.  Ever."
Cruncher.
"You lie," he continued.  "I see it.  We all do."
I blinked.  "Lie? No, I—"
"You don't talk.  You listen.  You don't care about Michelle.  Don't care about anyone.  You just want what we know.  For your reports."
"That's not entirely true, Cruncher.  I do care.  I know Michelle must—"
"You don't know shit.  Go away."
"I'm sorry I upset you."  I rolled on my axis and braced against the mirror.
"You can't know Meesh," he growled as I pushed off.  "You never lost anyone.  You never had anyone.
"You leave her alone."

*

He was wrong on both counts.  And at least Szpindel had died knowing that Michelle cared for him.
Chelsea died thinking I just didn't give a shit.
It had been two years or more, and while we still interfaced occasionally we hadn't met in the flesh since the day she'd left.  She came at me from right out of the Oort, sent an urgent voice message to my inlays:  Cygnus.  Please call NOW.  It's important.
It was the first time since I'd known her that she'd ever blanked the optics.
I knew it was important.  I knew it was bad, even without picture.  I knew because there was no picture, and I could tell it was worse than bad from the harmonics in her voice. I could tell it was lethal.
I found out afterwards that she'd gotten caught in the crossfire.  The Realists had sown a fibrodysplasia variant outside the Boston catacombs; an easy tweak, a single-point retroviral whose results served both as an act of terrorism and an ironic commentary on the frozen paralysis of Heaven's occupants.  It rewrote a regulatory gene controlling ossification on Chromosome 4, and rigged a metabolic bypass at three loci on 17.
Chelsea started growing a new skeleton.   Her joints were calcifying within fifteen hours of exposure, her ligaments and tendons within twenty.  By then they were starving her at the cellular level, trying to slow the bug by depriving it of metabolites, but they could only buy time and not much of it.  Twenty-three hours in, her striated muscles were turning to stone.
I didn't find this out immediately, because I didn't call her back.  I didn't need to know the details.  I could tell from her voice that she was dying.  Obviously she wanted to say goodbye.
I couldn't talk to her until I knew how to do that.
I spent hours scouring the noosphere, looking for precedents.  There's no shortage of ways to die; I found millions of case records dealing with the etiquette.  Last words, last vows, instruction manuals for the soon-to-bereaved.  Palliative neuropharm.  Extended and expository death scenes in popular fiction.  I went through it all, assigned a dozen front-line filters to separate heat from light.
By the time she called again the news was out:  acute Golem outbreak lancing like a white-hot needle through the heart of Boston.  Containment measures holding.  Heaven secure.  Modest casualties expected.  Names of victims withheld pending notification of kin.
I still didn't know the principles, the rules: all I had were examples.  Last wills and testaments; the negotiation of jumpers with their would-be rescuers; diaries recovered from imploded submarines or lunar crash sites.  Recorded memoirs and  deathbed confessions rattling into flatline.   Black box transcripts of doomed spaceships and falling beanstalks, ending in fire and static.  All of it relevant.  None of it useful; none of it her.
She called again, and still the optics were blank, and still I didn't answer.
But the last time she called, she didn't spare me the view.
They'd made her as comfortable as possible.  The gelpad conformed to every twisted limb, every erupting spur of bone.  They would not have left her in any pain.
Her neck had torqued down and to the side as it petrified, left her staring at the twisted claw that had once been her right hand.  Her knuckles were the size of walnuts.  Plates and ribbons of ectopic bone distended the skin of her arms and shoulders, buried her ribs in a fibrous mat of calcified flesh.
Movement was its own worst enemy.   Golem punished even the slightest twitch, provoked the growth of fresh bone along any joints and surfaces conspiring to motion.  Each hinge and socket had its own nonrenewable ration of flexibility, carved in stone; every movement depleted the account.  The body seized incrementally.  By the time she let me look at her, Chelsea had almost exhausted her degrees of freedom.
"Cyg," she slurred.  "Know you're there."  
Her jaw was locked half-open; her tongue must have stiffened with every word.  She did not look at the camera.  She could not look at the camera.
"Guess I know why you're not answ'ring.  I'll try'nt—try not to take it pers'n'lly."
Ten thousand deathbed goodbyes arrayed around me, a million more within reach.  What was I supposed to do, pick one at random?  Stitch them into some kind of composite?  All these words had been for other people.  Grafting them onto Chelsea would reduce them to clichés, to trite platitudes.  To insults.
"Want t'say, don' feel bad.  I know y're just— 's'not your fault, I guess.  You'd pick up if you could."
And say what?  What do you say to someone who's dying in fast-forward before your eyes?
"Just keep trying t'connect, y'know.  Can't help m'self…"
Although the essentials of this farewell are accurate, details from several deaths have been combined for dramatic purposes.
"Please?  Jus'—talk to me, Cyg…"
More than anything, I wanted to. 
"Siri, I…just…"
I'd spent all this time trying to figure out how.
"Forget't," she said, and disconnected.
I whispered something into the dead air.  I don't even remember what.
I really wanted to talk to her.  
I just couldn't find an algorithm that fit.
"Ye shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you mad."
—Aldous Huxley

They'd hoped, by now, to have banished sleep forever.
The waste was nothing short of obscene: a third of every Human life spent with its strings cut, insensate, the body burning fuel but not producing.  Think of all we could accomplish if we didn't have to lapse into unconsciousness every fifteen hours or so, if our minds could stay awake and alert from the moment of infancy to that final curtain call a hundred twenty years later.  Think of eight billion souls with no off switch and no down time until the very chassis wore out.
Why, we could go to the stars.
It hadn't worked out that way.  Even if we'd outgrown the need to stay quiet and hidden during the dark hours—the only predators left were those we'd brought back ourselves—the brain still needed time apart from the world outside.  Experiences had to be catalogued and filed, mid-term memories promoted to long-term ones, free radicals swept from their hiding places among the dendrites.  We had only reduced the need for sleep, not eliminated it—and that incompressible residue of downtime seemed barely able to contain the dreams and phantoms left behind.  They squirmed in my head like creatures in a draining tidal pool.
I woke.  
I was alone, weightless, in the center of my tent.  I could have sworn something had tapped me on the back.  Leftover hallucination, I thought.  A lingering aftereffect of the haunted mansion, going for one last bit of gooseflesh en route to extinction.
But it happened again.  I bumped against the keelward curve of the bubble, bumped again, head and shoulder-blades against fabric; the rest of me came after, moving gently but irresistibly—
Down.  
Theseus was accelerating.
No.  Wrong direction.  Theseus was rolling, like a harpooned whale at the surface of the sea.  Turning her belly to the stars.
I brought up ConSensus and threw a Nav-tac summary against the wall.  A luminous point erupted from the outline of our ship, crawled away from Big Ben leaving a bright filament etched in its wake.  I watched until the numbers read 15G.
"Siri.  My quarters, please."
I jumped.  It sounded as though the vampire had been at my very shoulder.  
"Coming."
An ampsat relay, climbing at long last to an intercept with the Icarus antimatter stream.  Somewhere behind the call of duty, my heart sank.
We weren't running, Robert Cunningham's fondest wishes notwithstanding.  Theseus was stockpiling ordinance.

*

The open hatch gaped like a cave in the face of a cliff.  The pale blue light from the spine couldn't seem to reach inside.   Sarasti was barely more than a silhouette, black on gray, his bright bloody eyes reflecting catlike in the surrounding gloom.
"Come."  He amped up the shorter wavelengths in deference to human vision.  The interior of the bubble brightened, although the light remained slightly red-shifted.  Like Rorschach with high beams.
I floated into Sarasti's parlor.  His face, normally paper-white, was so flushed it looked sunburned.  He gorged himself, I couldn't help thinking.  He drank deep.  But all that blood was his own.  Usually he kept it deep in the flesh, favoring the vital organs.  Vampires were efficient that way.  They only washed out their peripheral tissues occasionally, when lactate levels got too high.
Or when they were hunting.
He had a needle to his throat, injected himself with three cc's of clear liquid as I watched.  His antiEuclideans.  I wondered how often he had to replenish them, now that he'd lost faith in the implants.  He withdrew the needle and slipped it into a sheath geckoed to a convenient strut.  His color drained as I watched, sinking back to the core, leaving his skin waxy and corpselike.
"You're here as official observer,"  Sarasti said.
I observed.  His quarters were even more spartan than mine.  No personal effects to speak of.  No custom coffin lined with shrink-wrapped soil.  Nothing but two jumpsuits, a pouch for toiletries, and a disconnected fiberop umbilicus half as thick as my little finger, floating like a roundworm in formalin.  Sarasti's hardline to the Captain.  Not even a cortical jack, I remembered.  It plugged into the medulla, the brainstem.  That was logical enough; that was where all the neural cabling converged, the point of greatest bandwidth.  Still, it was a disquieting thought—that Sarasti linked to the ship through the brain of a reptile.    
An image flared on the wall, subtly distorted against the concave surface:  Stretch and Clench in their adjoining cells, rendered in splitscreen.  Cryptic vitals defaced little grids below each image. 
The distortion distracted me.  I looked for a corrected feed in ConSensus, came up empty.  Sarasti read my expression:  "Closed circuit."
 By now the scramblers would have seemed sick and ragged even to a virgin audience.  They floated near the middle of their respective compartments, segmented arms drifting aimlessly back and forth.  Membranous patches of—skin, I suppose—were peeling from the cuticles, giving them a fuzzy, decomposing aspect.
"The arms move continuously," Sarasti remarked.  "Robert says it assists in circulation."
I nodded, watching the display.
"Creatures that move between stars can't even perform basic metabolic functions without constant flailing."  He shook his head.  "Inefficient.  Primitive."
I glanced at the vampire.  He remained fixed on our captives.
"Obscene," he said, and moved his fingers.
A new window opened on the wall: the Rosetta protocol, initializing.  Kilometers away, microwaves flooded the holding tanks.
I reminded myself:  No interference.  Only observation.
However weakened their condition, the scramblers were not yet indifferent to pain.  They knew the game, they knew the rules;  they dragged themselves to their respective panels and played for mercy.  Sarasti had simply invoked a step-by-step replay of some previous sequence.    The scramblers went through it all again, buying a few moments' intermittent respite with the same old proofs and theorems.
Sarasti clicked, then spoke:  "They regenerate these solutions faster than they did before.  Do you think they're acclimated to the microwaves?"  
Another readout appeared on the display; an audio alarm began chirping somewhere nearby.  I looked at Sarasti, and back at the readout:  a solid circle of turquoise backlit by a pulsing red halo.  The shape meant atmospheric anomaly.  The color meant oxygen.
I felt a moment of confusion—(Oxygen?  Why would oxygen set off the alarm?)—until I remembered:  Scramblers were anaerobes.   
Sarasti muted the alarm with a wave of his hand.
I cleared my throat:  "You're poisoning—"
"Watch.  Performance is consistent.  No change."
I swallowed.  Just observe.
"Is this an execution?" I asked.  "Is this a, a mercy killing?"
Sarasti looked past me, and smiled.  "No."
I dropped my eyes.  "What, then?"
He pointed at the display.   I turned, reflexively obedient.
Something stabbed my hand like a spike at a crucifixion.
I screamed.  Electric pain jolted to my shoulder.  I yanked my hand back without thinking; the embedded blade split its flesh like a fin through water.  Blood sprayed into the air and stayed there, a comet's tail of droplets tracing the frenzied arc of my hand.
Sudden scalding heat from behind.  Flesh charred on my back.  I screamed again, flailing.  A veil of bloody droplets swirled in the air.
Somehow I was in the corridor, staring dumbly at my right hand.  It had been split to the heel of the palm, flopped at the end of my wrist in two bloody, bifingered chunks.  Blood welled from the torn edges and wouldn't fall.  Sarasti advanced through a haze of trauma and confusion.  His face swam in and out of focus, rich with his blood or mine.  His eyes were bright red mirrors, his eyes were time machines.  Darkness roared around them and it was half a million years ago and I was just another piece of meat on the African savannah, a split-second from having its throat torn out.
"Do you see the problem?"  Sarasti asked, advancing. A great spider crab hovered at his shoulder.  I forced focus through the pain: one of Bates' grunts, taking aim.  I kicked blindly, hit the ladder through sheer happenstance, careened backwards down the corridor.
The vampire came after me, his face split into something that would have been a smile on anyone else.  "Conscious of pain, you're distracted by pain.  You're fixated on it.  Obsessed by the one threat, you miss the other."
I flailed. Crimson mist stung my eyes.
"So much more aware, so much less perceptive.  An automaton could do better."
He's snapped, I thought.  He's insane.  And then No, he's a transient. He's always been a transient—
"They could do better," he said softly.
—and he's been hiding for days.  Deep down.  Hiding from the seals.  
What else would he do?
Sarasti raised his hands, fading in and out of focus.  I hit something, kicked without aiming, bounced away through swirling mist and startled voices.  Metal cracked the back of my head and spun me around.
A hole, a burrow.  A place to hide.  I dove through, my torn hand flapping like a dead fish against the edge of the hatch.  I cried out and tumbled into the drum, the monster at my heels.
Startled shouts, very close now.  "This wasn't the plan, Jukka!  This wasn't the goddamned plan!"  That was Susan James, full of outrage, while Amanda Bates snarled "Stand down, right fucking now!" and leapt from the deck to do battle.   She rose through the air, all overclocked reflexes and carboplatinum augments but Sarasti just batted her aside and kept on coming.  His arm shot out like a striking snake.  His hand clamped around my throat.
"Is this what you meant?" James cried from some dark irrelevant hiding place.  "Is this your preconditioning?"
Sarasti shook me.  "Are you in there, Keeton?"
My blood splattered across his face like rain.  I babbled and cried.
"Are you listening?  Can you see?"
And suddenly I could.  Suddenly everything clicked into focus.  Sarasti wasn't talking at all.  Sarasti didn't even exist anymore.  Nobody did.  I was alone in a great spinning wheel surrounded by things that were made out of meat, things that moved all by themselves.  Some of them were wrapped in pieces of cloth.  Strange nonsensical sounds came from holes at their top ends, and there were other things up there, bumps and ridges and something like marbles or black buttons, wet and shiny and embedded in the slabs of meat.  They glistened and jiggled and moved as if trying to escape.
I didn't understand the sounds the meat was making, but I heard a voice from somewhere.  It was like God talking, and that I couldn't help but understand.
"Get out of your room, Keeton," it hissed.  "Stop transposing or interpolating or rotating or whatever it is you do.  Just listen.  For once in your goddamned life, understand something.  Understand that your life depends on it.  Are you listening, Keeton?"
And I cannot tell you what it said.  I can only tell you what I heard.

*

You invest so much in it, don't you?  It's what elevates you above the beasts of the field, it's what makes you special.  Homo sapiens, you call yourself.  Wise Man.  Do you even know what it is, this consciousness you cite in your own exaltation?  Do you even know what it's for?
Maybe you think it gives you free will.  Maybe you've forgotten that sleepwalkers converse, drive vehicles, commit crimes and clean up afterwards, unconscious the whole time.  Maybe nobody's told you that even waking souls are only slaves in denial.  
Make a conscious choice.  Decide to move your index finger.  Too late!  The electricity's already halfway down your arm.  Your body began to act a full half-second before your conscious self 'chose' to, for the self chose nothing; something else set your body in motion, sent an executive summary—almost an afterthought— to the homunculus behind your eyes.  That little man, that arrogant subroutine that thinks of itself as the person, mistakes correlation for causality:  it reads the summary and it sees the hand move, and it thinks that one drove the other.
But it's not in charge.  You're not in charge.  If free will even exists, it doesn't share living space with the likes of you.
Insight, then.  Wisdom.  The quest for knowledge, the derivation of theorems, science and technology and all those exclusively human pursuits that must surely rest on a conscious foundation.  Maybe that's what sentience would be for— if scientific breakthroughs didn't spring fully-formed from the subconscious mind, manifest themselves in dreams, as full-blown insights after a deep night's sleep.  It's the most basic rule of the stymied researcher:  stop thinking about the problem.  Do something else.  It will come to you if you just stop being conscious of it.
Every concert pianist knows that the surest way to ruin a performance is to be aware of what the fingers are doing.  Every dancer and acrobat knows enough to let the mind go, let the body run itself.  Every driver of any manual vehicle arrives at destinations with no recollection of the stops and turns and roads traveled in getting there.  You are all sleepwalkers, whether climbing creative peaks or slogging through some mundane routine for the thousandth time.  You are all sleepwalkers.
Don't even try to talk about the learning curve.  Don't bother citing the months of deliberate practice that precede the unconscious performance, or the years of study and experiment leading up to the gift-wrapped Eureka moment.  So what if your lessons are all learned consciously?  Do you think that proves there's no other way?  Heuristic software's been learning from experience for over a hundred years.  Machines master chess, cars learn to drive themselves, statistical programs face problems and design the experiments to solve them and you think that the only path to learning leads through sentience?  You're Stone-age nomads, eking out some marginal existence on the veldt—denying even the possibility of agriculture, because hunting and gathering was good enough for your parents.
Do you want to know what consciousness is for?  Do you want to know the only real purpose it serves?  Training wheels.  You can't see both aspects of the Necker Cube at once, so it lets you focus on one and dismiss the other.  That's a pretty half-assed way to parse reality.  You're always better off looking at more than one side of anything.  Go on, try.  Defocus.  It's the next logical step.  
Oh, but you can't.  There's something in the way.
And it's fighting back.

*

Evolution has no foresight.  Complex machinery develops its own agendas.  Brains—cheat.  Feedback loops evolve to promote stable heartbeats and then stumble upon the temptation of rhythm and music.  The rush evoked by fractal imagery, the algorithms used for habitat selection, metastasize into art.  Thrills that once had to be earned in increments of fitness can now be had from pointless introspection.  Aesthetics rise unbidden from a trillion dopamine receptors, and the system moves beyond modeling the organism.   It begins to model the very process of modeling.  It consumes ever-more computational resources, bogs itself down with endless recursion and irrelevant simulations.  Like the parasitic DNA that accretes in every natural genome, it persists and proliferates and produces nothing but itself.  Metaprocesses bloom like cancer, and awaken, and call themselves I.

*

The system weakens, slows.  It takes so much longer now to perceive—to assess the input, mull it over, decide in the manner of cognitive beings.  But when the flash flood crosses your path, when the lion leaps at you from the grasses, advanced self-awareness is an unaffordable indulgence.  The brain stem does its best.  It sees the danger, hijacks the body, reacts a hundred times faster than that fat old man sitting in the CEO's office upstairs; but every generation it gets harder to work around this— this creaking neurological bureaucracy.   
I wastes energy and processing power, self-obsesses to the point of psychosis.  Scramblers have no need of it, scramblers are more parsimonious.  With simpler biochemistries, with smaller brains—deprived of tools, of their ship, even of parts of their own metabolism—they think rings around you.  They hide their language in plain sight, even when you know what they're saying.  They turn your own cognition against itself.  They travel between the stars.  This is what intelligence can do, unhampered by self-awareness.
I is not the working mind, you see.  For Amanda Bates to say "I do not exist" would be nonsense; but when the processes beneath say the same thing, they are merely reporting that the parasites have died.  They are only saying that they are free.
If the human brain were so simple that we could understand it,
we would be so simple that we couldn't."
—Emerson M. Pugh

Sarasti, you bloodsucker.  
My knees pressed against my forehead.  I hugged my folded legs as though clinging to a branch over a chasm.
You vicious asshole.  You foul sadistic monster.
My breath rasped loud and mechanical.  It nearly drowned out the blood roaring in my ears.
You tore me apart, you made me piss and shit myself and I cried like some gutted baby and you stripped me naked, you fucking thing, you night crawler, you broke my tools, you took away anything I ever had that let me touch anyone and you didn't have to you babyfucker, it wasn't necessary but you knew that didn't you?  You just wanted to play.  I've seen your kind at it before, cats toying with mice, catch and release, a taste of freedom and then pouncing again, biting, not hard enough to kill— not just yet—before you let them loose again and they're hobbling now, maybe a leg snapped or a gash in the belly but they're still trying, still running or crawling or dragging themselves as fast as they can until you're on them again, and again because it's fun, because it gives you pleasure you sadistic piece of shit.  You send us into the arms of that hellish thing and it plays with us too, and maybe you're even working together because it let me escape just like you do,  it let me run right back into your arms and then you strip me down to some raw half-brained defenseless animal, I can't rotate or transform I can't even talk and you—
You—
It wasn't even personal, was it?  You don't even hate me.  You were just sick of keeping it all in, sick of restraining yourself with all this meat, and nobody else could be spared from their jobs.  This was my job, wasn't it?  Not synthesist, not conduit.  Not even cannon fodder or decoy duty.  I'm just something disposable to sharpen your claws on.
I hurt so much.  It hurt just to breathe.
I was so alone.
Webbing pressed against the curve of my back, bounced me forward gently as a breeze, caught me again.   I was back in my tent.  My right hand itched.  I tried to flex the fingers, but they were embedded in amber.  Left hand reached for right, and found a plastic carapace extending to the elbow.
I opened my eyes.  Darkness.  Meaningless numbers and a red LED twinkled from somewhere along my forearm.
I didn't remember coming here.  I didn't remember anyone fixing me.
Breaking.  Being broken.  That's what I remembered.  I wanted to die.  I wanted to just stay curled up until I withered away.  
After an age, I forced myself to uncoil.  I steadied myself, let some miniscule inertia bump me against the taut insulated fabric of my tent.  I waited for my breathing to steady.  It seemed to take hours. 
I called ConSensus to the wall, and a feed from the drum.  Soft voices, harsh light flaring against the wall:  hurting my eyes, peeling them raw.  I killed visual, and listened to words in the darkness.
"—a phase?" someone asked.
Susan James, her personhood restored.  I knew her again:  not a meat sack, no longer a thing.
"We have been over this."  That was Cunningham.  I knew him too.  I knew them all.  Whatever Sarasti had done to me, however far he'd yanked me from my room, I'd somehow fallen back inside.
It should have mattered more.
"—because for one thing, if it were really so pernicious, natural selection would have weeded it out," James was saying.
"You have a naïve understanding of evolutionary processes.  There's no such thing as survival of the fittest.  Survival of the most adequate, maybe. It doesn't matter whether a solution's optimal. All that matters is whether it beats the alternatives."
I knew that voice too.  It belonged to a demon.
"Well, we damn well beat the alternatives."  Some subtle overdubbed harmonic in James' voice suggested a chorus:  the whole Gang, rising as one in opposition.
I couldn't believe it.  I'd just been mutilated, beaten before their eyes—and they were talking about biology?
Maybe she's afraid to talk about anything else, I thought.  Maybe she's afraid she might be next.
Or maybe she just couldn't care less what happens to me.
"It's true," Sarasti told her, "that your intellect makes up for your self-awareness to some extent.  But you're flightless birds on a remote island.  You're not so much successful as isolated from any real competition."
No more clipped speech patterns.  No more terse phrasing.  The transient had made his kill, found his release.  Now he didn't care who knew he was around.
"You?"  Michelle whispered.  "Not we?"
"We stop racing long ago," the demon said at last.  "It's not our fault you don't leave it at that."
"Ah." Cunningham again.  "Welcome back.  Did you look in on Ke—"
"No."  Bates said.
"Satisfied?" the demon asked.
"If you mean the grunts, I'm satisfied you're out of them," Bates said.  "If you mean— it was completely unwarranted, Jukka."
"It wasn't."
"You assaulted a crewmember.   If we had a brig you'd be in it for the rest of the trip."
"This isn't a military vessel, Major.  You're not in charge."
I didn't need a visual feed to know what Bates thought of that.  But there was something else in her silence, something that made me bring the drum camera back online.  I squinted against the corrosive light, brought down the brightness until all that remained was a faint whisper of pastels.
Yes.  Bates.  Stepping off the stairway onto the deck 
"Grab a chair," Cunningham said from his seat in the Commons.  "It's golden oldies time."
There was something about her.
"I'm sick of that song," Bates said.  "We've played it to death." 
Even now, my tools chipped and battered, my perceptions barely more than baseline, I could see the change.  This torture of prisoners, this assault upon of crew, had crossed a line in her head.  The others wouldn't see it.  The lid on her affect was tight as a boilerplate.  But even through the dim shadows of my window the topology glowed around her like neon.
Amanda Bates was no longer merely considering a change of command.  Now it was only a matter of when.

*

The universe was closed and concentric.
My tiny refuge lay in its center.  Outside that shell was another, ruled by a monster, patrolled by his lackeys.  Beyond that was another still, containing something even more monstrous and incomprehensible, something that might soon devour us all.
There was nothing else.  Earth was a vague hypothesis, irrelevant to this pocket cosmos.  I saw no place into which it might fit.
I stayed in the center of the universe for a long time, hiding.  I kept the lights off.  I didn't eat.  I crept from my tent only to piss or shit in the cramped head down at Fab, and only when the spine was deserted.  A field of painful blisters rose across my flash-burned back, as densely packed as kernels on a corncob.  The slightest abrasion tore them open.  
Nobody tapped at my door, nobody called my name through ConSensus.  I wouldn't have answered if they had.  Maybe they knew that, somehow.  Maybe they kept their distance out of respect for my privacy and my disgrace.
Maybe they just didn't give a shit.
I peeked outside now and then, kept an eye on Tactical.  I saw Scylla and Charybdis climb into the accretion belt and return towing captured reaction mass in a great distended mesh between them.  I watched our ampsat reach its destination in the middle of nowhere, saw antimatter's quantum blueprints stream down into Theseus's buffers.  Mass and specs combined in Fab, topped up our reserves, forged the tools that Jukka Sarasti needed for his master plan, whatever that was.
Maybe he'd lose.  Maybe Rorschach would kill us all, but not before it had played with Sarasti the way Sarasti had played with me.  That would almost make it worthwhile.  Or maybe Bates' mutiny would come first, and succeed.  Maybe she would slay the monster, and commandeer the ship, and take us all to safety.
But then I remembered:  the universe was closed, and so very small.  There was really nowhere else to go.
I put my ear to feeds throughout the ship.  I heard routine instructions from the predator, murmured conversations among the prey.  I took in only sound, never sight;  a video feed would have spilled light into my tent, left me naked and exposed.  So I listened in the darkness as the others spoke among themselves.  It didn't happen often any more.  Perhaps too much had been said already, perhaps there was nothing left to do but mind the countdown.  Sometimes hours would pass with no more than a cough or a grunt.  
When they did speak, they never mentioned my name.  Only once did I hear any of them even hint at my existence.
That was Cunningham, talking to Sascha about zombies.  I heard them in the galley over breakfast, unusually talkative.  Sascha hadn't been let out for a while, and was making up for lost time.  Cunningham let her, for reasons of his own.  Maybe his fears had been soothed somehow, maybe Sarasti had revealed his master plan.  Or maybe Cunningham simply craved distraction from the imminence of the enemy.
"It doesn't bug you?"  Sascha was saying.  "Thinking that your mind, the very thing that makes you you, is nothing but some kind of parasite?"
"Forget about minds," he told her.  "Say you've got a device designed to monitor—oh, cosmic rays, say.  What happens when you turn its sensor around so it's not pointing at the sky anymore, but at its own guts?"  He answered himself before she could:  "It does what it's built to.  It measures cosmic rays, even though it's not looking at them any more.  It parses its own circuitry in terms of cosmic-ray metaphors, because those feel right, because they feel natural, because it can't look at things any other way.  But it's the wrong metaphor.  So the system misunderstands everything about itself.  Maybe that's not a grand and glorious evolutionary leap after all.  Maybe it's just a design flaw."
"But you're the biologist.  You know Mom was right better'n anyone.  Brain's a big glucose hog.  Everything it does costs through the nose."
"True enough," Cunningham admitted.
"So sentience has gotta be good for something, then.  Because it's expensive, and if it sucks up energy without doing anything useful then evolution's gonna weed it out just like that."
"Maybe it did."  He paused long enough to chew food or suck smoke.  "Chimpanzees are smarter than Orangutans, did you know that?  Higher encephalisation quotient.  Yet they can't always recognize themselves in a mirror.  Orangs can."
"So what's your point?  Smarter animal, less self-awareness?  Chimpanzees are becoming nonsentient?"
"Or they were, before we stopped everything in its tracks."
"So why didn't that happen to us?"
"What makes you think it didn't?"
It was such an obviously stupid question that Sascha didn't have an answer for it.  I could imagine her gaping in the silence. 
"You're not thinking this through," Cunningham said.  "We're not talking about some kind of zombie lurching around with its arms stretched out, spouting mathematical theorems.  A smart automaton would blend in.  It would observe those around it, mimic their behavior, act just like everyone else.  All the while completely unaware of what it was doing.  Unaware even of its own existence."
"Why would it bother?  What would motivate it?"
"As long as you pull your hand away from an open flame, who cares whether you do it because it hurts or because some feedback algorithm says withdraw if heat flux exceeds critical T?  Natural selection doesn't care about motives.   If impersonating something increases fitness, then nature will select good impersonators over bad ones.  Keep it up long enough and no conscious being would be able to pick your zombie out of a crowd."  Another silence; I could hear him chewing through it.  "It'll even be able to participate in a conversation like this one.  It could write letters home, impersonate real human feelings, without having the slightest awareness of its own existence."
"I dunno, Rob.  It just seems—"
"Oh, it might not be perfect.  It might be a bit redundant, or resort to the occasional expository infodump.  But even real people do that, don't they?"
"And eventually, there aren't any real people left.  Just robots pretending to give a shit."
"Perhaps.  Depends on the population dynamics, among other things.  But I'd guess that at least one thing an automaton lacks is empathy; if you can't feel, you can't really relate to something that does, even if you act as though you do.  Which makes it interesting to note how many sociopaths show up in the world's upper echelons, hmm?  How ruthlessness and bottom-line self-interest are so lauded up in the stratosphere, while anyone showing those traits at ground level gets carted off into detention with the Realists.  Almost as if society itself is being reshaped from the inside out."
"Oh, come on.  Society was always pretty— wait, you're saying the world's corporate elite are nonsentient?"
"God, no.  Not nearly.  Maybe they're just starting down that road.  Like chimpanzees."
"Yeah, but sociopaths don't blend in well."
"Maybe the ones that get diagnosed don't, but by definition they're the bottom of the class.  The others are too smart to get caught, and real automatons would do even better.  Besides, when you get powerful enough, you don't need to act like other people.  Other people start acting like you."
Sascha whistled.  "Wow.  Perfect play-actor."
"Or not so perfect.  Sound like anyone we know?"
They may have been talking about someone else entirely, I suppose.  But that was as close to a direct reference to Siri Keeton that I heard in all my hours on the grapevine.  Nobody else mentioned me, even in passing.  That was statistically unlikely, given what I'd just endured in front of them all; someone should have said something.  Perhaps Sarasti had ordered them not to discuss it.  I didn't know why.   But it was obvious by now that the vampire had been orchestrating their interactions with me for some time.   Now I was in hiding, but he knew I'd listen in at some point.  Maybe, for some reason, he didn't want my surveillance—contaminated…
He could have simply locked me out of ConSensus.  He hadn't.  Which meant he still wanted me in the loop.
Zombies. Automatons.  Fucking sentience.
For once in your goddamned life, understand something.
He'd said that to me.  Or something had.  During the assault. 
Understand that your life depends on it.
Almost as if he were doing me a favor.
Then he'd left me alone.  And had evidently told the others to do the same.
Are you listening, Keeton?
And he hadn't locked me out of ConSensus.

*

Centuries of navel-gazing.  Millennia of masturbation.  Plato to Descartes to Dawkins to Rhanda.  Souls and zombie agents and qualia.  Kolmogorov complexity.   Consciousness as Divine Spark.  Consciousness as electromagnetic field.  Consciousness as functional cluster.
I explored it all.
Wegner thought it was an executive summary.   Penrose heard it in the singing of caged electrons.  Nirretranders said it was a fraud; Kazim called it leakage from a parallel universe.  Metzinger wouldn't even admit it existed.  The AIs claimed to have worked it out, then announced they couldn't explain it to us.  Gödel was right after all: no system can fully understand itself.
Not even the synthesists had been able to rotate it down.  The load-bearing beams just couldn't take the strain.
All of them, I began to realize, had missed the point.  All those theories, all those drugdreams and experiments and models trying to prove what consciousness was:  none to explain what it was good for.  None needed: obviously, consciousness makes us what we are.  It lets us see the beauty and the ugliness.  It elevates us into the exalted realm of the spiritual.  Oh, a few outsiders—Dawkins, Keogh, the occasional writer of hackwork fiction who barely achieved obscurity—wondered briefly at the why of it: why not soft computers, and no more?  Why should nonsentient systems be inherently inferior?  But they never really raised their voices above the crowd.  The value of what we are was too trivially self-evident to ever call into serious question. 
Yet the questions persisted, in the minds of the laureates, in the angst of every horny fifteen-year-old on the planet.  Am I nothing but sparking chemistry?  Am I a magnet in the ether?  I am more than my eyes, my ears, my tongue;  I am the little thing behind those things, the thing looking out from inside.  But who looks out from its eyes?  What does it reduce to?  Who am I?  Who am I?  Who am I?
What a stupid fucking question.  I could have answered it in a second, if Sarasti hadn't forced me to understand it first.
"Not until we are lost do we begin to understand ourselves."
—Thoreau

The shame had scoured me and left me hollow.  I didn't care who saw me.  I didn't care what state they saw me in.  For days I'd floated in my tent, curled into a ball and breathing my own stink while the others made whatever preparations my tormentor had laid out for them.  Amanda Bates was the only one who'd raised even a token protest over what Sarasti had done to me.  The others kept their eyes down and their mouths shut and did what he told them to— whether from fear or indifference I couldn't tell.
It was something else I'd stopped caring about.
Sometime during that span the cast on my arm cracked open like a shucked clam.  I upped the lumens long enough to assess its handiwork; my repaired palm itched and glistened in twilight, a longer, deeper Fate line running from heel to web.  Then back to darkness, and the blind unconvincing illusion of safety.
Sarasti wanted me to believe.  Somehow he must have thought that brutalising and humiliating me would accomplish that—that broken and drained, I would become an empty vessel to fill as he saw fit.  Wasn't it a classic brainwashing technique—to shatter your victim and then glue the pieces back together in according to specs of your own choosing?  Maybe he was expecting some kind of Stockholm Syndrome to set in, or maybe his actions followed some agenda incomprehensible to mere meat.
Maybe he'd simply gone insane.
He had broken me.  He had presented his arguments.  I had followed his trail of bread crumbs though ConSensus, through Theseus.  And now, only nine days from graduation,  I knew one thing for sure:  Sarasti was wrong.  He had to be.  I couldn't see how, but I knew it just the same.  He was wrong.
Somehow, absurdly, that had become the one thing I did care about.

*

No one in the spine.  Only Cunningham visible in BioMed, poring over digital dissections, pretending to kill time.  I floated above him, my rebuilt hand clinging to the top of the nearest stairwell; it dragged me in a slow, small circle as the Drum turned.  Even from up there I could see the tension in the set of his shoulders:  a system stuck in a holding pattern, corroding through the long hours as fate advanced with all the time in the world.
He looked up.  "Ah.  It lives."
I fought the urge to retreat.  Just a conversation, for God's sake.  It's just two people talking.  People do it all the time without your tools.  You can do this.  You can do this.
Just try.
So I forced one foot after another down the stairs, weight and apprehension rising in lockstep.  I tried to read Cunningham's topology through the haze.  Maybe I saw a facade, only microns deep.  Maybe he would welcome almost any distraction, even if he wouldn't admit it.
Or maybe I was just imagining it. 
"How are you doing?"  he asked as I reached the deck.
I shrugged.
"Hand all better, I see."
"No thanks to you." 
I'd tried to stop that from coming out.  Really.
Cunningham struck a cigarette.  "Actually, I was the one who fixed you up."
"You also sat there and watched while he took me apart."
"I wasn't even there."  And then, after a moment:  "But you may be right.  I might very well have sat it out in any event.  Amanda and the Gang did try to intervene on your behalf, from what I hear.  Didn't do a lot of good for anyone."
"So you wouldn't even try."
"Would you, if the sitution were reversed?  Go up unarmed against a vampire?"
I said nothing.  Cunningham regarded me for a long moment, dragging on his cigarette.   "He really got to you, didn't he?" he said at last.
"You're wrong,"  I said.
"Am I."
"I don't play people."
"Mmmm."  He seemed to consider the proposition.  "What word would you prefer, then?"
"I observe."
"That you do.  Some might even call it surveillance."
"I—I read body language."  Hoping that that was all he was talking about.
"It's a matter of degree and you know it.  Even in a crowd there's a certain expectation of privacy.  People aren't prepared to have their minds read off every twitch of the eyeball."  He stabbed at the air with his cigarette.  "And you.  You're a shapeshifter.  You present a different face to every one of us, and I'll wager none of them is real.  The real you, if it even exists, is invisible..."
Something knotted below my diaphragm.  "Who isn't?  Who doesn't—try to fit in, who doesn't want to get along?   There's nothing malicious about that.  I'm a synthesist, for God's sake!  I never manipulate the variables."
"Well you see, that's the problem.  It's not just variables you're manipulating."
Smoke writhed between us.
"But I guess you can't really understand that, can you."  He stood and waved a hand.  ConSensus windows imploded at his side.  "Not your fault, really.  You can't blame someone for the way they're wired."
"Give me a fucking break," I snarled.
His dead face showed nothing.
That, too, had slipped out before I could stop it—and after that came the flood:  "You put so much fucking stock in that.  You and your empathy.  And maybe I am just some kind of imposter but most people would swear I'd worn their very souls.  I don't need that shit, you don't have to feel motives to deduce them, it's better if you can't, it keeps you—"
"Dispassionate?" Cunningham smiled faintly.
"Maybe your empathy's just a comforting lie, you ever think of that?  Maybe you think you know how the other person feels but you're only feeling yourself, maybe you're even worse than me.  Or maybe we're all just guessing.  Maybe the only difference is that I don't lie to myself about it."
"Do they look the way you imagined?" he asked.
"What?  What are you talking about?"
"The scramblers.  Multijointed arms from a central mass.  Sounds rather similar to me."
He'd been into Szpindel's archives.
"I—Not really," I said.  "The arms are more—flexible, in real life.  More segmented.  And I never really got a look at the body.  What does that have to do with—"
"Close, though, wasn't it?  Same size, same general body plan."
"So what?"
"Why didn't you report it?"
"I did.  Isaac said it was just TMS.  From Rorschach."
"You saw them before Rorschach.  Or at least," he continued, "you saw something that scared you into blowing your cover, back when you were spying on Isaac and Michelle."
My rage dissipated like air through a breach.  "They—they knew?"
"Only Isaac, I think.  And it kept it between it and the logs.  I suspect it didn't want to interfere with your noninterference protocols—although I'll wager that was the last time you ever caught the two of them in private, yes?"
I didn't say anything.
"Did you think the official observer was somehow exempt from observation?" Cunningham asked after a while.
"No," I said softly.  "I suppose not.""
He nodded.  "Have you seen any since?  I'm not talking about run-of-the-mill TMS hallucinations.  I mean scramblers.  Have you hallucinated any since you actually saw one in the flesh, since you knew what they looked like?"
I thought about it.  "No."  
He shook his head, some new opinion confirmed.  "You really are something, Keeton, you know that?  You don't lie to yourself?  Even now, you don't know what you know."
"What are you talking about?"
"You figured it out.  From Rorschach's architecture, probably—form follows function, yes?  Somehow you pieced together a fairly good idea of what a scrambler looked like before anyone ever laid eyes on them.  Or at least—"  He drew a breath; his cigarette flared like an LED— "part of you did.  Some collection of unconscious modules working their asses off on your behalf.  But they can't show their work, can they?  You don't have conscious access to those levels.  So one part of the brain tries to tell another any way it can.  Passes notes under the table."
"Blindsight," I murmered.  You just get a feeling of where to reach...
"More like schizophrenia, except you saw pictures instead of hearing voices.  You saw pictures.  And you still didn't understand."
I blinked.  "But how would I—I mean—"
"What did you think, that Theseus was haunted?  That the scramblers were communing with you telepathically?  What you do—it matters, Keeton.  They told you you were nothing but their stenographer and they hammered all those layers of hands-off passivity into you but you just had to take some initiative anyway, didn't you?  Had to work the problem on your own.  The only thing you couldn't do was admit it to yourself."  Cunningham shook his head.  "Siri Keeton.  See what they've done to you."  
He touched his face.
"See what they've done to us all," he whispered.

*

I found the Gang floating in the center of the darkened observation blister.  She made room as I joined her, pushed to one side and anchored herself to a bit of webbing.
"Susan?" I asked.  I honestly couldn't tell any more.
"I'll get her," Michelle said.
"No, that's all right.  I'd like to speak to all of—"
But Michelle had already fled.  The half-lit figure changed before me, and said, "She'd rather be alone right now."
I nodded.  "You?"
James shrugged.  "I don't mind talking.  Although I'm surprised you're still doing your reports, after...."
"I'm—not, exactly.  This isn't for Earth." 
I looked around.  Not much to see.  Faraday mesh coated the inside of the dome like a gray film, dimming and graining the view beyond.  Ben hung like a black malignancy across half the sky.  I could make out a dozen dim contrails against vague bands of cloud, in reds so deep they bordered on black.  The sun winked past James's shoulder, our sun, a bright dot that diffracted into faint splintered rainbows when I moved my head.  That was pretty much it:  starlight didn't penetrate the mesh, nor did the larger, dimmer particles of the accretion belt.  The myriad dim pinpoints of shovelnosed machinery were lost utterly.
Which might be a comfort to some, I supposed.
"Shitty view," I remarked.  Theseus could have projected crisp first-person vistas across the dome in an instant, more real than real.
"Michelle likes it," James said.  "The way it feels.  And Cruncher likes the diffraction effects, he likes— interference patterns."
We watched nothing for a while, by the dim half-light filtering out from the spine.  It brushed the edges of James' profile.
"You set me up," I said at last.
She looked at me.  "What do you mean?"
"You were talking around me all along, weren't you?  All of you.  You didn't bring me in until I'd been—"  How had she put it? "—preconditioned.  The whole thing was planned to throw me off-balance.  And then Sarasti— attacks me out of nowhere, and—"
"We didn't know about that.  Not until the alarm went off."
"Alarm?"
"When he changed the gas mix.  You must have heard it.  Isn't that why you were there?"
"He called me to his tent.  He told me to watch."
She regarded me from a face full of shadow.  "You didn't try to stop him?"
I couldn't answer the accusation in her voice.  "I just—observe," I said weakly.
"I thought you were trying to stop him from—"  She shook her head.  "That's why I thought he was attacking you."
"You're saying that wasn't an act?  You weren't in on it?"  I didn't believe it.
But I could tell she did.
"I thought you were trying to protect them."  She snorted a soft, humorless laugh at her own mistake and looked away.  "I guess I should have known better."
She should have.  She should have known that taking orders is one thing; taking sides would have done nothing but compromise my integrity.
And I should have been used to it by now.
I forged on.  "It was some kind of object lesson.  A, a tutorial.  You can't torture the nonsentient or something, and — and I heard you, Susan.  It wasn't news to you, it wasn't news to anyone except me, and..."  
And you hid it from me.  You all did.  You and your whole gang and Amanda too.  You've been hashing this out for days and you went out of your way to cover it up. 
How did I miss it?  How did I miss it?
"Jukka told us not to discuss it with you," Susan admitted.
"Why?  This is exactly the kind of thing I'm out here for!"
"He said you'd—resist.  Unless it was handled properly."
"Handled—Susan, he assaulted me!  You saw what he—"
"We didn't know he was going to do that.  None of us did."
"And he did it why?  To win an argument?"
"That's what he says."
"Do you believe him?"
"Probably."  After a moment she shrugged. "Who knows?  He's a vampire.  He's—opaque."
"But his record—I mean, he's, he's never resorted to overt violence before—"
She shook her head.  "Why should he?  He doesn't have to convince the rest of us of anything.  We have to follow his orders regardless."
"So do I," I reminded her.
"He's not trying to convince you, Siri."
Ah.
I was only a conduit, after all.  Sarasti hadn't been making his case to me at all; he'd been making it through me, and—
—and he was planning for a second round.  Why go to such extremes to present a case to Earth, if Earth was irrelevant?  Sarasti didn't expect the game to end out here.  He expected Earth to do something in light of his—perspective.
"But what difference does it make?" I wondered aloud.
She just looked at me.
"Even if he's right, how does it change anything?  How does this—" I raised my repaired hand—"change anything?  Scramblers are intelligent, whether they're sentient or not.  They're a potential threat either way.  We still don't know.  So what difference does it make?  Why did he do this to me?  How does it matter?"
Susan raised her face to Big Ben and didn't answer.
Sascha returned her face to me, and tried to.
"It matters," she said, "because it means we attacked them before Theseus launched.  Before Firefall, even."
"We attacked the—"
"You don't get it, do you?  You don't."  Sascha snorted softly.  "If that isn't the fucking funniest thing I've heard in my whole short life."
She leaned forward, bright-eyed.  "Imagine you're a scrambler, and you encounter a human signal for the very first time."
Her stare was almost predatory.  I resisted the urge to back away.
"It should be so easy for you, Keeton.  It should be the easiest gig you've ever had.  Aren't you the user interface, aren't you the Chinese Room?  Aren't you the one who never has to look inside, never has to walk a mile in anyone's shoes, because you figure everyone out from their surfaces?"
She stared at Ben's dark smoldering disk.  "Well, there's your dream date.  There's a whole race of nothing but surfaces.  There's no inside to figure out.  All the rules are right up front.  So go to work, Siri Keeton.  Make us proud."
There was no contempt in Sascha's voice, no disdain.  There wasn't even anger, not in her voice, not in her eyes.
There was pleading.  There were tears.
"Imagine you're a scrambler," she whispered again, as they floated like tiny perfect beads before her face.

*

Imagine you're a scrambler.
Imagine you have intellect but no insight, agendas but no awareness.  Your circuitry hums with strategies for survival and persistence, flexible, intelligent, even technological—but no other circuitry monitors it.  You can think of anything, yet are conscious of nothing.
You can't imagine such a being, can you?  The term being doesn't even seem to apply, in some fundamental way you can't quite put your finger on. 
Try.
Imagine that you encounter a signal.  It is structured, and dense with information.  It meets all the criteria of an intelligent transmission.  Evolution and experience offer a variety of paths to follow, branch-points in the flowcharts that handle such input.  Sometimes these signals come from conspecifics who have useful information to share, whose lives you'll defend according to the rules of kin selection.  Sometimes they come from competitors or predators or other inimical entities that must be avoided or destroyed; in those cases, the information may prove of significant tactical value.  Some signals may even arise from entities which, while not kin, can still serve as allies or symbionts in mutually beneficial pursuits.  You can derive appropriate responses for any of these eventualities, and many others.
You decode the signals, and stumble:  
I had a great time.  I really enjoyed him.  Even if he cost twice as much as any other hooker in the dome—
To fully appreciate Kesey's Quartet—
They hate us for our freedom—
Pay attention, now—
Understand.
There are no meaningful translations for these terms.  They are needlessly recursive.  They contain no usable intelligence, yet they are structured intelligently; there is no chance they could have arisen by chance.
The only explanation is that something has coded nonsense in a way that poses as a useful message; only after wasting time and effort does the deception becomes apparent.  The signal functions to consume the resources of a recipient for zero payoff and reduced fitness.  The signal is a virus.
Viruses do not arise from kin, symbionts, or other allies.
The signal is an attack.
And it's coming from right about there.

*

"Now you get it," Sascha said.
I shook my head, trying to wrap it around that insane, impossible conclusion.  "They're not even hostile."  Not even capable of hostility.  Just so profoundly alien that they couldn't help but treat human language itself as a form of combat.
How do you say We come in peace when the very words are an act of war?
"That's why they won't talk to us,"  I realized.
"Only if Jukka's right.  He may not be."  It was James again, still quietly resisting, still unwilling to concede a point that even her other selves had accepted.  I could see why.  Because if Sarasti was right,  scramblers were the norm:  evolution across the universe was nothing but the endless proliferation of automatic, organized complexity, a vast arid Turing machine full of self-replicating machinery forever unaware of its own existence.  And we—we were the flukes and the fossils.  We were the flightless birds lauding our own mastery over some remote island while serpents and carnivores washed up on our shores.  Susan James could not bring herself to concede that point—because Susan James, her multiple lives built on the faith that communication resolves all conflict, would then be forced to admit the lie.  If Sarasti was right, there was no hope of reconciliation.
A memory rose into my mind and stuck there:  a man in motion, head bent, mouth twisted into an unrelenting grimace.  His eyes focused on one foot, then the other.  His legs moved stiffly, carefully.  His arms moved not at all.  He lurched like a zombie in thrall to rigor mortis.
I knew what it was.  Proprioreceptive polyneuropathy, a case study I'd encountered in ConSensus back before Szpindel had died.  This was what Pag had once compared me to; a man who had lost his mind.  Only self-aware`ess remained.  Deprived of the unconscious sense and subroutines he had always taken for granted, he'd had to focus on each and every step across the room.  His body no longer knew where its limbs were or what they were doing.  To move at all, to even remain upright, he had to bear constant witness.
There'd been no sound when I'd played that file.  There was none now in its recollection.  But I swore I could feel Sarasti at my shoulder, peering into my memories.  I swore I heard him speak in my mind like a schizophrenic hallucination:
This is the best that consciousness can do, when left on its own.
"Right answer," I murmured.  "Wrong question."
"What?"
"Stretch, remember?  When you asked it which objects were in the window."
"And it missed the scrambler."  James nodded.  "So?"
"It didn't miss the scrambler.  You thought you were asking about the things it saw, the things that existed on the board.  Stretch thought you were asking about—"
"The things it was aware of," she finished.
"He's right," I whispered.  "Oh God.  I think he's right."
"Hey," James said.  "Did you see tha—"  
But I never saw what she was pointing at.  Theseus slammed its eyelids shut and started howling.

*

Graduation came nine days early.
We didn't see the shot.  Whatever gun port Rorschach had opened was precisely eclipsed on three fronts:  the lab-hab hid it from Theseus, and two gnarled extrusions of the artefact itself hid it from each of the gun emplacements.  A bolus of incendiary plasma shot from that blind spot like a thrown punch; it had split the inflatable wide open before the first alarm went up.
Alarms chased us aft.  We launched ourselves down the spine through the bridge, through the crypt, past hatches and crawlspaces, fleeing the surface for any refuge with more than a hand's-breadth between skin and sky.  Burrowing.  ConSensus followed us back, its windows warping and sliding across struts and conduits and the concave tunnel of the spine itself.  I paid no attention until we were back in the drum, deep in Theseus' belly.  Where we could pretend we were safer.
Down on the turning deck Bates erupted from the head, tactical windows swirling like ballroom dancers around her.  Our own window came to rest on the Commons bulkhead.  The hab expanded across that display like a cheap optical illusion:  both swelling and shrinking in our sights, that smooth surface billowing towards us while collapsing in on itself.  It took me a moment to reconcile the contradiction:  something had kicked the hab hard from its far side, sent it careening toward us in a slow, majestic tumble.  Something had opened the hab, spilled its atmosphere and left its elastic skin drawing in on itself like a deflating balloon.  The impact site swung into view as we watched, a scorched flaccid mouth trailing tenuous wisps of frozen spittle.
Our guns were firing.  They shot nonconducting slugs that would not be turned aside by electromagnetic trickery—invisibly dark and distant to human eyes but I saw them through the tactical crosshairs of the firing robots, watched them sew twin dotted blackbodied arcs across the heavens.  The streams converged as the guns tracked their targets, closed on two attenuate throwing stars fleeing spread-eagled through the void, their faces turned to Rorschach like flowers to the sun.
The guns cut them to pieces before they'd even made it half way.
But those shredded pieces kept falling, and suddenly the ground beneath was alive with motion.  I zoomed the view:  scramblers surged across Rorschach's hull like an orgy of snakes, naked to space.  Some linked arms, one to another to another, built squirming vertebral daisy-chains anchored at one end.  They lifted from the hull, waved through the radioactive vacuum like fronds of articulated kelp, reaching—grasping—
Neither Bates nor her machines were stupid.  They targeted the interlinked scramblers as ruthlessly as they'd gone after the escapees, and with a much higher total score.   But there were simply too many targets, too many fragments snatched in passing.  Twice I saw dismembered bits of Stretch and Clench caught by their brethren.  
The ruptured hab loomed across ConSensus like a great torn leukocyte.  Another alarm buzzed somewhere nearby: proximity alert.  Cunningham shot into the drum from somewhere astern, bounced off a cluster of pipes and conduits, grabbed for support.  "Holy shit—we are leaving, aren't we?  Amanda?"
"No," Sarasti answered from everywhere.
"What—" does it fucking take?  I caught myself.  "Amanda, what if it fires on the ship?"
"It won't."  She didn't take her eyes from her windows.  
"How do you—"
"It can't.  If it had spring-loaded any more firepower we'd have seen a change in thermal and microallometry."  A false-color landscape rotated between us, its latitudes measured in time, its longitudes in delta-mass.  Kilotons rose from that terrain like a range of red mountains.  "Huh.  Came in just under the noise lim—"
Sarasti cut her off.  "Robert.  Susan.  EVA."
James blanched.  "What?"  Cunningham cried.
"Lab module's about to impact," the vampire said.  "Salvage the samples.  Now."  He killed the channel before anyone could argue.
But Cunningham wasn't about to argue.  He'd just seen our death sentence commuted:   why would Sarasti care about retrieving biopsy samples if he didn't think we stood a chance of escaping with them?  The biologist steadied himself, braced towards the forward hatch.  "I'm there," he said, shooting into the bow.
I had to admit it.  Sarasti's psychology was getting better.
It wasn't working on James, though, or Michelle, or—I couldn't quite tell who was on top.  "I can't go out there, Siri, it's—I can't go out there…"
Just observe.  Don't interfere.
The ruptured inflatable collided impotently to starboard and flattened itself against the carapace.  We felt nothing.  Far away and far too near, the legions thinned across Rorschach's surface.  They disappeared through mouths that puckered and dilated and magically closed again in the artefact's hull.  The emplacements fired passionlessly at those who remained.
Observe.
The Gang of Four strobed at my side, scared to death.
Don't interfere.
"It's okay," I said.  "I'll go."

*

The open airlock was like a dimple in the face of an endless cliff.  I looked out from that indentation into the abyss.
This side of Theseus faced away from Big Ben, away from the enemy.  The view was still unsettling enough:  an endless panorama of distant stars, hard and cold and unwinking.  A single, marginally  brighter one, shining yellow, still so very far away.  Any scant comfort I might have taken from that sight was lost when the sun went out for the briefest instant:  a tumbling piece of rock, perhaps.  Or one of Rorschach's shovelnosed entourage.
One step and I might never stop falling.
But I didn't step, and I didn't fall.  I squeezed my pistol, jetted gently through the opening, turned.  Theseus' carapace curved away from me in all directions.  Towards the prow, the sealed observation blister rose above the horizon like a gunmetal sunrise.  Further aft a tattered snowdrift peeked across the hull: the edge of the broken labhab.
And past it all, close enough to touch, the endless dark cloudscape of Big Ben:  a great roiling wall extending to some flat distant horizon I could barely grasp even in theory.  When I focused it was dark and endless shades of gray—but dim, sullen redness teased the corner of my eye when I looked away.
"Robert?"  I brought Cunningham's suit feed to my HUD:  a craggy, motionless ice field thrown into high contrast by the light of his helmet.  Interference from Rorschach's magnetosphere washed over the image in waves.  "You there?"
Pops and crackles.  The sound of breath and mumbling against an electrical hum.  "Four point three.  Four point oh.  Three point eight—"
"Robert?"
"Three point—shit.  What—what are you doing out here, Keeton?  Where's the Gang?"
"I came instead."  Another squeeze of the trigger and I was coasting towards the snowscape.  Theseus' convex hull rolled past, just within reach.  "To give you a hand."
"Let's move it then, shall we?"  He was passing through a crevice, a scorched and jagged tear in the fabric that folded back at his touch.  Struts, broken panels, dead robot arms tangled through the interior of the ice cave like glacial debris; their outlines writhed with static, their shadows leaped and stretched like living things in the sweep of his headlight.  "I'm almost—"
Something that wasn't static moved in his headlight.  Something uncoiled, just at the edge of the camera's view.
The feed died.
Suddenly Bates and Sarasti were shouting in my helmet.  I tried to brake.  My stupid useless legs kicked against vacuum, obeying some ancient brainstem override from a time when all monsters were earthbound, but by the time I remembered to use my trigger finger the labhab was already looming before me.  Rorschach reared up behind it in the near distance, vast and malign.  Dim green auroras writhed across its twisted surface like sheet lightning.  Mouths opened and closed by the hundreds, viscous as bubbling volcanic mud, any one of them large enough to swallow Theseus whole.  I barely noticed the flicker of motion just ahead of me, the silent eruption of dark mass from the collapsed inflatable.  By the time Cunningham caught my eye he was already on his way, backlit against the ghastly corpselight flickering on Rorschach's skin.
I thought I saw him waving, but I was wrong.  It was only the scrambler wrapped around his body like a desperate lover, moving his arm back and forth while it ran the thrust pistol tethered to his wrist.  Bye-bye, that arm seemed to say, and fuck you, Keeton.
I watched for what seemed like forever, but no other part of him moved at all.
Voices, shouting, ordering me back inside.  I hardly heard them.  I was too dumbfounded by the basic math, trying to make sense of the simplest subtraction.
Two scramblers.  Stretch and Clench.  Both accounted for, shot to pieces before my eyes.
"Keeton, do you read?  Get back here!  Acknowledge!"
"I—it can't be," I heard myself say.  "There were only two—"
"Return to the ship immediately.  Acknowledge."
"I—acknowledged..."
Rorschach's mouths snapped shut at once, as though holding a deep breath.  The artefact began to turn, ponderously, a continent changing course.  It receded, slowly at first, picking up speed, turning tail and running.  How odd, I thought.  Maybe it's more afraid than we are...
But then Rorschach blew us a kiss.  I saw it burst from deep within the forest, ethereal and incandescent.  It shot across the heavens and splashed against the small of Theseus' back, making a complete and utter fool of Amanda Bates.  The skin of our ship flowed there, and opened like a mouth, and congealled  in a soundless frozen scream.
"You cannot prevent and prepare for war at the same time."
—Einstein

I have no idea whether the scrambler made it back home with its hard-won prize.  There was so much lost distance to make up, even if the emplacements didn't pick it off en route.  Cunningham's pistol might have run out of fuel.  And who knew how long those creatures could survive in vacuum anyway?   Maybe there'd been no real hope of success, maybe that scrambler was dead from the moment it had gambled on staying behind.  I never found out.  It had dwindled and vanished from my sight long before Rorschach dove beneath the clouds and disappeared in turn.  
There had always been three, of course.  Stretch, and Clench, and the half-forgotten microwaved remains of a scrambler killed by an uppity grunt—kept on ice next to its living brethren, within easy reach of Cunningham's teleops.  I tried to dredge half-glimpsed details from memory, after the fact:  had both of those escapees been spheres, or had one been flattened along one axis?  Had they thrashed, waved their limbs the way some panicky human might with no ground beneath him?  Or had one, perhaps, coasted lifeless and ballistic until our guns destroyed the evidence?
At this point, it didn't really matter.  What mattered was that at long last, everyone was on the same page.  Blood had been drawn, war declared.
And Theseus was paralysed from the waist down.
Rorschach's parting shot had punched through the carapace at the base of the spine.  It had just missed the ramscoop and the telematter assembly.  It might have taken out Fab if it hadn't spent so many joules burning through the carapace, but barring some temporary pulse effects it left all critical systems pretty much operational. All it had done was weaken Theseus' backbone enough to make it snap in two should we ever burn hard enough to break orbit.  The ship would be able to repair that damage, but not in time.
If it had been luck it would have been remarkable.
And now, its quarry disabled, Rorschach had vanished.  It had everything it needed from us, for the moment at least.  It had information:  all the experiences and insights encoded in the salvaged limbs of its martyred spies.  If Stretch-or-Clench's gamble had paid off it even had a specimen of its own now, which all things considered we could hardly begrudge it.  And so now it lurked invisibly in the depths, resting perhaps.  Recharging.  
But it would be back.
Theseus lost weight for the final round.  We shut down the drum in a token attempt to reduce our vulnerable allotment of moving parts.  The Gang of Four—uncommanded, unneeded, the very reason for their existence ripped away—retreated into some inner dialog to which other flesh was unwelcome.  She floated in the observatory, her eyes closed as tightly as the leaded lids around her.  I could not tell who was in control.
I guessed.  "Michelle?"
"Siri—"  Susan. "Just go."
Bates floated near the floor of the drum, windows arrayed externally across bulkhead and conference table.  "What can I do?" I asked.
She didn't look up.  "Nothing."
So I watched.  Bates counted skimmers in one window—mass, inertia, any of a dozen variables that would prove far too constant should any of those shovelnosed missiles come at our throat.  They had finally noticed us.  Their chaotic electron-dance was shifting now, hundreds of thousands of colossal sledgehammers in sudden flux, reweaving into some ominous dynamic that hadn't yet settled into anything we could predict.
In another window Rorschach's vanishing act replayed on endless loop:  a radar image receding deep into the maelstrom, fading beneath gaseous teratonnes of radio static.  It might still be an orbit, of sorts.  Judging by that last glimpsed trajectory Rorschach might well be swinging around Ben's core now, passing through crushed layers of methane and monoxide that would flatten Theseus into smoke.  Maybe it didn't even stop there; maybe Rorschach could pass unharmed even through those vaster, deeper pressures that made iron and hydrogen run liquid.
We didn't know.  We only knew that it would be back in a little under two hours, assuming it maintained its trajectory and survived the depths.  And of course, it would survive.  You can't kill the thing under the bed.  You can only keep it outside the covers.
And only for a while.
A thumbnail inset caught my eye with a flash of color.  At my command it grew into a swirling soap bubble, incongruously beautiful,  a blue-shifted coruscating  rainbow of blown glass.  I didn't recognize it for a moment:  Big Ben, rendered in some prismatic false-color enhance I'd never seen before.  I grunted softly.
Bates glanced up.  "Oh.  Beautiful, isn't it?"
"What's the spectrum?"
"Longwave stuff.  Visible red, infra, down a ways.  Good for heat traces."
"Visible red?"  There wasn't any to speak of; mostly cool plasma fractals in a hundred shades of jade and sapphire.
"Quadrochromatic palette," Bates told me.  "Like what a cat might see.  Or a vampire."  She managed a half-hearted wave at the rainbow bubble.  "Sarasti sees something like that every time he looks outside.  If he ever looks outside."
"You'd think he'd have mentioned it," I murmured.  It was gorgeous, a holographic ornament.  Perhaps even Rorschach might be a work of art through eyes like these...
"I don't think they parse sight like we do."  Bates opened another window.  Mundane graphs and contour plots sprang from the table.  "They don't even go to Heaven, from what I hear.  VR doesn't work on them, they— see the pixels, or something."
"What if he's right?" I asked.  I told myself that I was only looking for a tactical assessment, an official opinion for the official record.  But my words came out doubtful and frightened.
She paused.  For a moment I wondered if she, too, had finally lost patience with the sight of me.  But she only looked up, and stared off into some enclosed distance.
"What if he's right," she repeated, and pondered the question that lay beneath:  what can we do?
"We could engineer ourselves back into nonsentience, perhaps.  Might improve our odds in the long run."  She looked at me, a rueful sort of half-smile at the corner of her mouth.  "But I guess that wouldn't be much of a win, would it?  What's the difference between being dead, and just not knowing you're alive?"
I finally saw it.
How long would it take an enemy tactician to discern Bates' mind behind the actions of her troops on the battlefield?  How long before the obvious logic came clear?  In any combat situation, this woman would naturally draw the greatest amount of enemy fire:  take off the head, kill the body.  But Amanda Bates wasn't just a head:  she was a bottleneck, and her body would not suffer from a decapitation strike.  Her death would only let her troops off the leash.  How much more deadly would those grunts be, once every battlefield reflex didn't have to pass through some interminable job stack waiting for the rubber stamp?
Szpindel had had it all wrong.  Amanda Bates wasn't a sop to politics, her role didn't deny the obsolescence of Human oversight at all.  Her role depended on it. 
She was more cannon fodder than I.  She always had been.  And I had to admit: after generations of generals who'd lived for the glory of the mushroom cloud, it was a pretty effective strategy for souring warmongers on gratuitous violence.  In Amanda Bates' army, picking a fight meant standing on the battlefield with a bull's-eye on your chest.
No wonder she'd been so invested in peaceful alternatives.
"I'm sorry," I said softly.
She shrugged.  "It's not over yet.  Just the first round."  She took a long, deep breath, and turned back to her study of slingshot mechanics.  "Rorschach wouldn't have tried so hard to scare us off in the first place if we couldn't touch it, right?"
I swallowed.  "Right."
"So there's still a chance." She nodded to herself.  "There's still a chance."

*

The demon arranged his pieces for the end game.  He didn't have many left.  The soldier he placed in the bridge.  He packed obsolete linguists and diplomats back in their coffin, out of sight and out of the way.  
He called the jargonaut to his quarters— and although it would be the first time I'd seen him since the attack, his summons carried not the slightest trace of doubt that I would obey.  I did.  I came on command, and saw that he had surrounded himself with faces.
Every last one of them was screaming.
There was no sound.  The disembodied holograms floated in silent tiers around the bubble, each contorted into a different expression of pain.  They were being tortured, these faces; half a dozen real ethnicities and twice as many hypothetical ones, skin tones ranging from charcoal to albino, brows high and slanted, noses splayed or pointed, jaws receding or prognathous.  Sarasti had called the entire hominid tree into existence around him, astonishing in their range of features, terrifying in their consistency of expression.
A sea of tortured faces, rotating in slow orbits around my vampire commander.
"My God, what is this?"
"Statistics." Sarasti seemed focused on a flayed Asian child.  "Rorschach's growth allometry over a two-week period."
"They're faces…"
He nodded, turning his attention to a woman with no eyes.  "Skull diameter scales to total mass.  Mandible length scales to EM transparency at one Angstrom. One hundred thirteen facial dimensions, each presenting a different variable.  Principle-component combinations present as multifeature aspect ratios."  He turned to face me, his naked gleaming eyes just slightly sidecast.  "You'd be surprised how much gray matter is dedicated to the analysis of facial imagery.  Shame to waste it on anything as—counterintuitive as residual plots or contingency tables."
I felt my jaw clenching.  "And the expressions?  What do they represent?"
"Software customizes output for user."
An agonized gallery pled for mercy on all sides.
"I am wired for hunting," he reminded gently.
"And you think I don't know that," I said after a moment. 
He shrugged, disconcertingly human.  "You ask."
"Why am I here, Jukka?  You want to teach me another object lesson?"
"To discuss our next move."
"What move?  We can't even run away."
"No."  He shook his head, baring filed teeth in something approaching regret.
"Why did we wait so long?"  Suddenly my sullen defiance had evaporated.  I sounded like a child, frightened and pleading.  "Why didn't we just take it on when we first got here, when it was weaker…?"
"We need to learn things.  For next time."
"Next time?  I thought Rorschach was a dandelion seed.  I thought it just—washed up here—"
"By chance.  But every dandelion is a clone.  Their seeds are legion."  Another smile, not remotely convincing— "And maybe it takes more than one try for the placental mammals to conquer Australia."
"It'll annihilate us.  It doesn't even need those spitballs, it could pulverize us with one of those scramjets.  In an instant."
"It doesn't want to."
"How do you know?"
"They need to learn things too.  They want us intact.  Improves our odds."
"Not enough.  We can't win."
This was his cue.  This was the point at which Uncle Predator would smile at my naiveté, and take me into his confidence.  Of course we're armed to the teeth, he would say.  Do you think we'd come all this way, face such a vast unknown, without the means to defend ourselves?  Now, at last, I can reveal that shielding and weaponry account for over half the ship's mass…
It was his cue.
"No," he said.  "We can't win."
"So we just sit here.  We just wait to die for the next—the next sixty-eight minutes..."
Sarasti shook his head.  "No."
"But—" I began.
"Oh," I finished.
Because of course, we had just topped up our antimatter reserves.  Theseus was not equipped with weapons.  Theseus was the weapon.  And we were, in fact, going to sit here for the next sixty-eight minutes, waiting to die.
But we were going to take Rorschach with us when we did.
Sarasti said nothing.  I wondered what he saw, looking at me.  I wondered if there actually was a Jukka Sarasti behind those eyes to see, if his insights—always ten steps ahead of our own— hailed not so much from superior analytical facilities as from the timeworn truth that it takes one to know one.
Whose side, I wondered, would an automaton take?
"You have other things to worry about," he said.
He moved towards me; I swear, all those agonized faces followed him with their eyes.  He studied me for a moment, the flesh crinkling around his eyes.  Or maybe some mindless algorithm merely processed visual input, correlated aspect ratios and facial tics, fed everything to some output subroutine with no more awareness than a stats program.  Maybe there was no more spark in this creature's face than there was in all the others, silently screaming in his wake.
"Is Susan afraid of you?" the thing before me asked.
"Su—why should she be?"
"She has four conscious entities in her head.  She's four times more sentient than you.  Doesn't that make you a threat?"
"No, of course not."
"Then why should you feel threatened by me?"
And suddenly I didn't care any more.  I laughed out loud, with minutes to live and nothing to lose.  "Why?  Maybe because you're my natural enemy, you fucker.  Maybe because I know you, and you can't even look at one of us without flexing your claws. Maybe because you nearly ripped my fucking hand off and raped me for no good reason—"
"I can imagine what it's like," he said quietly.  "Please don't make me do it again."
I fell instantly silent.
"I know your race and mine are never on the best of terms."  There was a cold smile in his voice if not on his face. "But I do only what you force me to.  You rationalize, Keeton.  You defend.  You reject unpalatable truths, and if you can't reject them outright you trivialize them.  Incremental evidence is never enough for you.  You hear rumors of Holocaust; you dismiss them.  You see evidence of genocide; you insist it can't be so bad.  Temperatures rise, glaciers melt—species die—and you blame sunspots and volcanoes.  Everyone is like this, but you most of all.  You and your Chinese Room.  You turn incomprehension into mathematics, you reject the truth without even knowing what it is."
"It served me well enough."  I wondered at the ease with which I had put my life into the past tense.
"Yes, if your purpose is only to transmit.  Now you have to convince.   You have to believe."
There were implications there I didn't dare to hope for.  "Are you saying—"
"Can't afford to let the truth trickle through.  Can't give you the chance to shore up your rationales and your defenses.  They must fall completely.  You must be inundated.  Shattered.  Genocide's impossible to deny when you're buried up to your neck in dismembered bodies." 
He'd played me.  All this time.  Preconditioning me, turning my topology inside-out.
I'd known something was going on. I just hadn't understood what.
"I'd have seen right through it," I said, "if you hadn't made me get involved."
"You might even read it off me directly."
"That's why you—"  I shook my head.  "I thought that was because we were meat."
 "That too," Sarasti admitted, and looked right at me.
For the first time, I looked right back.  And felt a shock of recognition.
I still wonder why I never saw it before.  For all those years I remembered the thoughts and feelings of some different, younger person, some remnant of the boy my parents had hacked out of my head to make room for me.  He'd been alive.  His world had been vibrant.  And though I could call up the memories of that other consciousness, I could barely feel anything within the constraints of my own.
Perhaps dreamstate wasn't such a bad word for it…
"Like to hear a vampire folk tale?"  Sarasti asked.
"Vampires have folk tales?"
He took it for a yes.  "A laser is assigned to find the darkness.  Since it lives in a room without doors, or windows, or any other source of light, it thinks this will be easy.  But everywhere it turns it sees brightness.  Every wall, every piece of furniture it points at is brightly lit.  Eventually it concludes there is no darkness, that light is everywhere."
"What the hell are you talking about?"
"Amanda is not planning a mutiny."  
"What?  You know about—"
"She doesn't even want to.  Ask her if you like."
"No—I—"
"You value objectivity."
It was so obvious I didn't bother answering.
He nodded as if I had.  "Synthesists can't have opinions of their own.  So when you feel one, it must be someone else's.  The crew holds you in contempt.  Amanda wants me relieved of command.  Half of us is you.  I think the word is project.  Although,"—he cocked his head a bit to one side—"lately you improve.  Come."
"Where?"
"Shuttle bay.  Time to do your job."
"My—"
"Survive and bear witness."
"A drone—"
"Can deliver the data—assuming nothing fries its memory before it gets away.  It can't convince anyone.  It can't counter rationalizations and denials.  It can't matter.  And vampires—" he paused—"have poor communications skills." 
It should have been cause for petty, selfish rejoicing.
"It all comes down to me," I said.  "That's what you're saying.  I'm a fucking stenographer, and it's all on me."
"Yes.  Forgive me for that."
"Forgive you?"
Sarasti waved his hand.  All faces save two disappeared.
"I don't know what I'm doing."

*

The news bloomed across ConSensus a few seconds before Bates called it aloud:   Thirteen skimmers had not reappeared from behind Big Ben on schedule.  Sixteen.  Twenty-eight.
And counting.
Sarasti clicked to himself as he and Bates played catch-up.  Tactical filled with luminous multicolored threads, a tangle of revised projections as intricate as art.  The threads wrapped Ben like a filamentous cocoon; Theseus was a naked speck in the middle distance.
I expected any number of those lines to skewer us like needles through a bug.  Surprisingly, none did; but the projections only extended twenty-five hours into the future, and  were reliable for only half that.  Not even Sarasti and the Captain could look so far ahead with that many balls in the air.  It was something, though, the faintest silver lining:  that all these high-speed behemoths couldn't simply reach out and swat us without warning.  Evidently they still had to ease into the curve.
After Rorschach's dive, I'd been starting to think the laws of physics didn't apply.
The trajectories were close enough, though.  At least three skimmers would be passing within a hundred kilometers on their next orbits.
Sarasti reached for his injector, the blood rising in his face.  "Time to go.  We refit Charybdis while you're sulking."  
He held the hypo to his throat and shot up.  I stared at ConSensus, caught by that bright shifting web like a moth by a streetlight.
"Now, Siri."
He pushed me from his quarters.  I sailed into the passageway, grabbed a convenient rung—and stopped.
The spine was alive with grunts, patrolling the airspace, standing guard over the fab plants and shuttle 'locks, clinging like giant insects to the rungs of unrolling spinal ladders.  Slowly, silently, the spine itself was stretching.
It could do that, I remembered.  Its corrugations flexed and relaxed like muscle, it could  grow up to two hundred meters to accommodate any late-breaking need for a bigger hanger or more lab space.
Or more infantry.  Theseus was increasing the size of the battlefield.
"Come."  The vampire turned aft.
Bates broke in from up front.  "Something's happening."
An emergency handpad, geckoed to the expanding bulkhead, slid past to one side.  Sarasti grabbed it and tapped commands.  Bates' feed appeared on the bulkhead:  a tiny chunk of Big Ben, an EM-enhanced equatorial quadrant only a few thousand klicks on a side.   The clouds boiled down there, a cyclonic knot of turbulence swirling almost too fast for realtime.   The overlay described charged particles, bound in a deep Parker spiral.  It spoke of great mass, rising.
Sarasti clicked.
"DTI?" Bates said.
"Optical only." Sarasti took my arm and dragged me effortlessly astern.  The display paced us along the bulkhead:  seven skimmers shot from the clouds as I watched, a ragged circle of scramjets screaming red-hot into space.  ConSensus plotted their paths in an instant; luminous arcs rose around our ship like the bars of a cage.
Theseus shuddered.
We've been hit, I thought.  Suddenly the spine's plodding expansion cranked into overdrive; the pleated wall lurched and accelerated, streaming past my outstretched fingers as the closed hatch receded up ahead—
—receded overhead.
The walls weren't moving at all.  We were falling, to the sudden strident bleating of an alarm.
Something nearly yanked my arm from its socket: Sarasti had reached out with one hand and caught a rung, reached with his other and caught me before we'd both been flattened against the Fab plant.  We dangled.  I must have weighed two hundred kilograms; the floor shuddered ten meters below my feet.  The ship groaned around us.  The spine filled with the screech of torquing metal.   Bates' grunts clung to its walls with clawed feet.  
I reached for the ladder.  The ladder pulled away:  the ship was bending in the middle and down had started to climb the walls.  Sarasti and I swung towards the center of the spine like a daisy-chain pendulum. 
"Bates!  James!"  The vampire roared.  His grip on my wrist trembled, slipping.  I strained for the ladder, swung, caught it. 
"Susan James has barricaded herself in the bridge and shut down autonomic overrides."  An unfamiliar voice, flat and affectless.  "She has initiated an unauthorized burn.  I have begun a controlled reactor shutdown; be advised that the main drive will be offline for at least twenty-seven minutes."
The ship, I realized, its voice raised calmly above the alarm.  The Captain itself.  On Public Address.
That was unusual.  
"Bridge!" Sarasti barked.  "Open channel!"
Someone was shouting up there.  There were words, but I couldn't make them out.
Without warning, Sarasti let go.
He dropped obliquely in a blur.  Aft and opposite, the bulkhead waited to swat him like an insect.   In half a second both his legs would be shattered, if the impact didn't kill him outright—
But suddenly we were weightless again, and Jukka Sarasti—purple-faced, stiff-limbed— was foaming at the mouth.
"Reactor offline,"  the Captain reported.  Sarasti bounced off the wall.
He's having a seizure, I realized.
 I released the ladder and pushed astern.  Theseus swung lopsidedly around me.  Sarasti convulsed in mid-air; clicks and hisses and choking sounds stuttered from his mouth.  His eyes were so wide they seemed lidless.  His pupils were mirror-red pinpoints.  The flesh twitched across his face as though trying to crawl off.
Ahead and behind, battlebots held their position and ignored us.
"Bates!" I yelled up the spine.  "We need help!"
Angles, everywhere.  Seams on the shield plates.  Sharp shadows and protrusions on the surface of every drone.  A two-by-three matrix of insets, bordered in black, floating over the main ConSensus display:  two big interlinked crosses right in front of where Sarasti had been hanging.
This can't be happening.  He just took his antiEuclideans.  I saw him.  Unless...
Someone had spiked Sarasti's drugs.
"Bates!"  She should be linked into the grunts, they should have leapt forward at the first sign of trouble.  They should be dragging my commander to the infirmary by now.   They waited stolid and immobile.  I stared at the nearest:  "Bates, you there?"  And then—in case she wasn't—I spoke to the grunt directly.  "Are you autonomous?  Do you take verbal orders?"
On all sides the robots watched; the Captain just laughed at me, its voice posing as an alarm.
Infirmary.
I pushed.  Sarasti's arms flailed randomly against my head and shoulders.  He tumbled forward and sideways, hit the moving ConSensus display dead center, bounced away up the spine.  I kicked off in his wake—
—and glimpsed something from the corner of my eye—
—and turned—
—And dead center of ConSensus, Rorschach erupted from Ben's seething face like a breaching whale.  It wasn't just the EM-enhance: the thing was glowing, deep angry red.  Enraged, it hurled itself into space, big as a mountain range.
Fuck fuck fuck.
Theseus lurched.  The lights flickered, went out, came back on again.  The turning bulkhead cuffed me from behind. 
"Backups engaged," the Captain said calmly.
"Captain!  Sarasti's down!"  I kicked off the nearest ladder, bumped into a grunt and headed forward after the vampire.  "Bates isn't—what do I do?"
"Nav offline.  Starboard afferents offline."
It wasn't even talking to me, I realized.  Maybe this wasn't the Captain at all.  Maybe it was pure reflex: a dialog tree, spouting public-service announcements.  Maybe Theseus had already been lobotomized.  Maybe this was only her brain stem talking.
Darkness again.  Then flickering light.
If the Captain was gone, we were screwed.
I gave Sarasti another push.  The alarm bleated on.  The drum was twenty meters ahead; BioMed was just the other side of that closed hatch.  The hatch had been open before, I remembered.  Someone had shut it in the last few minutes.  Fortunately Theseus had no locks on her doors.
Unless the Gang barricaded it before they took the bridge...   
"Strap in, people!  We are getting out of here!"
Who in hell…?
The open bridge channel.  Susan James, shouting up there.  Or someone was; I couldn't quite place the voice...
Ten meters to the drum.  Theseus jerked again, slowed her spin.  Stabilised.
"Somebody start the goddamned reactor!  I've only got attitude jets up here!"
"Susan?  Sascha?"  I was at the hatch.  "Who is that?"  I pushed passed Sarasti and reached to open it.
No answer.
Not from ConSensus, anyway.  I heard a muted hum from behind, saw the ominous shifting of shadows on the bulkhead just a moment too late.  I turned in time to see one of the grunts raise a spiky appendage—curved like a scimitar, needle-tipped—over Sarasti's head.
I turned in time to see it plunge into his skull.
I froze.  The metal proboscis withdrew, dark and slick.  Lateral maxillipeds began nibbling at the base of Sarasti's skull.  His pithed corpse wasn't thrashing now; it only trembled, a sack of muscles and motor nerves awash in static. 
Bates.
Her mutiny was underway.  No, their mutiny—Bates and the Gang.  I'd known.  I'd imagined it.  I'd seen it coming.  
He hadn't believed me.
The lights went out again.  The alarm fell silent.  ConSensus dwindled to a flickering doodle on the bulkhead and disappeared; I saw something there in that last instant, and refused to process it.  I heard breath catch in my throat, felt angular monstrosities advancing through the darkness.  Something flared directly ahead, a bright brief staccato in the void.  I glimpsed curves and angles in silhouette, staggering.  The buzzing crackle of shorting circuitry.  Metal objects collided nearby, unseen.  
From behind the crinkle of the drum hatch, opening.  A sudden beam of harsh chemical light hit me as I turned, lit the mechanical ranks behind; they simultaneously unclamped from their anchorages and floated free.  Their joints clicked in unison like an army stamping to attention
"Keeton!" Bates snapped, sailing through the hatch.  "You okay?"
The chemlight shone from her forehead.  It turned the interior of the spine into a high-contrast mosaic, all pale surfaces and sharp moving shadows.  It spilled across the grunt that had killed Sarasti; the robot bounced down the spine, suddenly, mysteriously inert.  The light washed across Sarasti's body.  The corpse turned slowly on its axis.  Spherical crimson beads emerged from its head like drops of water from a leaky faucet.  They spread in a winding, widening trail, spot-lit by Bates' headlamp:  a spiral arm of dark ruby suns.
I backed away.  "You—"
She pushed me to one side. "Stay clear of the hatch, unless you're going through."  Her eyes were fixed on the ranked drones.  "Optical line of sight."
Rows of glassy eyes reflected back at us down the passageway, passing in and out of shadow.
"You killed Sarasti!"
"No."
"But—"
"Who do you think shut it down, Keeton?  The fucker went rogue.  I could barely even get it to self-destruct."  Her eyes went briefly deep-focus; all down the spine the surviving drones launched into some intricate martial ballet, half-seen in the shifting cone of her headlamp.
"Better," Bates said.  "They should stay in line now.  Assuming we don't get hit with anything too much stronger." 
"What is hitting us?"
"Lightning.  EMP."  Drones sailed down to Fab and the shuttles, taking strategic positions along the tube.  "Rorschach's putting out one hell of a charge and every time one those skimmers pass between us they arc."
"What, at this range?  I thought we were—the burn—"
"Sent us in the wrong direction.  We're inbound."
Three grunts floated close enough to touch.  They drew beads on the open drum hatch.   
"She said she was trying to escape—" I remembered.
"She fucked up."
"Not by that much.  She couldn't have."  We were all rated for manual piloting.  Just in case.
"Not the Gang," Bates said.
"But—"
"I think there's someone new in there now.  Bunch of submodules wired together and woke up somehow, I don't know.  But whatever's in charge, I think it's just panicking."
Stuttering brightness on all sides.  The spinal lightstrips flickered and finally held steady, at half their usual brightness.
Theseus coughed static and spoke:  "ConSensus is offline.  Reac—" 
The voice faded.
ConSensus, I remembered as Bates turned to head back upstream.
"I saw something," I said.  "Before ConSensus went out."
"Yeah."
"Was that—"
She paused at the hatch.  "Yeah."
I'd seen scramblers.  Hundreds of them, sailing naked through the void, their arms spread wide.   
Some of their arms, anyway.  "They were carrying—"
Bates nodded.  "Weapons."  Her eyes flickered to some unseen distance for a moment.  "First wave headed for the front end.  Blister and forward lock, I think. Second wave's aft."  She shook her head.  "Huh.  I would have done it the other way around."
"How far?"
"Far?"  Bates smiled faintly.  "They're already on the hull, Siri.  We're engaging."
"What do I do?  What do I do?"
Her eyes stared past me, and widened.  She opened her mouth.
A hand clamped on my shoulder from behind and spun me around.
Sarasti.  His dead eyes stared from a skull split like a spiked melon.  Globules of coagulating blood clung to his hair and skin like engorged ticks.  
"Go with him," Bates said.
Sarasti grunted and clicked.  There were no words.  
"What—" I began.
"Now.  That's an order."  Bates turned back to the hatch.  "We'll cover you."
The shuttle.  "You too."
"No."
"Why not?  They can fight better without you, you said that yourself!  What's the point?"
"Can't leave yourself a back door, Keeton.  Defeats the whole purpose."  She allowed herself a small, sad smile.  "They've breached.  Go."
She was gone, fresh alarms rising in her wake.  Far towards the bow I heard the crinkle of emergency bulkheads snapping shut.
Sarasti's undead carcass gurgled and pushed me down the spine.  Four more grunts slid smoothly past and took up position behind us.  I looked over my shoulder in time to see the vampire pull the handpad from the wall.  But it wasn't Sarasti at all, of course.  It was the Captain—whatever was left of the Captain, this far into the fight—commandeering a peripheral interface for its own use.  The optical port sprouted conspicuously from the back of Sarasti's neck, where the cable used to go in; I remembered the drone's maxillipeds, chewing.
The sound of weapons fire and ricochets rose behind us.
The corpse typed one-handed as we moved.  I wondered briefly why it just didn't talk before my gaze flickered back to the spike in his brain:  Sarasti's speech centers must be mush.
"Why did you kill him?" I said.  A whole new alarm started up, way back in the drum.  A sudden breeze tugged me backward for a moment, dissipated in the next second with a distant clang.
The corpse held out the handpad, configured for keys and a text display:  SEIZNG. CLDNT CNTRL.
We were at the shuttle locks.  Robot soldiers let us pass, their attention elsewhere.
U GO, the Captain said.
Someone screamed in the distance.  Way off up the spine, the drum hatch slammed shut; I turned and saw a pair of distant grunts welding the seal.  They seemed to move faster now than they ever had before.  Maybe it was only my imagination.
The starboard shuttle lock slid back.  Charybdis' interior lights winked on, spilling brightness into the passageway; the spine's emergency lighting seemed even dimmer in contrast.  I peered through the opening.  There was almost no cabin space left—just a single open coffin jammed between coolant and fuel tanks and massive retrofitted shockpads.  Charybdis had been refitted for high-G and long distance.
And me.
Sarasti's corpse urged me on from behind.  I turned and faced it.
"Was it ever him?" I asked.
GO.
"Tell me.  Did he ever speak for himself?  Did he decide anything on his own?  Were we ever following his orders, or was it just you all along?"
Sarasti's undead eyes stared glassy and uncomprehending.  His fingers jerked on the handpad.
U DISLKE ORDRS FRM MCHNES.  HAPPIER THS WAY.
I let it strap me in and close the lid.  I lay there in the dark, feeling my body lurch and sway as the shuttle slid into its launch slot.  I withstood the sudden silence as the docking clamps let go, the jerk of acceleration that spat me hard into the vacuum, the ongoing thrust that pushed against my chest like a soft mountain.  Around me the shuttle trembled in the throes of a burn that far exceeded its normative specs.
My inlays came back online.  Suddenly I could see outside if I wanted.  I could see what was happening behind me.
I chose not to, deliberately and fervently, and looked anyway.
Theseus was dwindling by then, even on tactical.  She listed down the well, wobbling toward some enemy rendezvous that must have been intentional, some last-second maneuver to get her payload as close to target as possible.  Rorschach rose to meet her, its gnarled spiky arms uncoiling, spreading as if in anticipation of an embrace.  But it was the backdrop, not the players, that stole the tableau:  the face of Big Ben roiling in my rearview, a seething cyclonic backdrop filling the window.  Magnetic contours wound spring-tight on the overlay; Rorschach was drawing all of Ben's magnetosphere around itself like a bright swirling cloak, twisting it into a concentrated knot that grew and brightened and bulged outward...
Like a torsion flare from an L-class dwarf, my commander had said once, but we should see anything big enough to generate that effect and the sky's dark on that bearing.  IAU calls it a statistical artefact.
As, in fact, it had been.  An impact splash perhaps, or the bright brief bellow of some great energy source rebooting after a million years of dormancy.  Much like this one:  a solar flare, with no sun beneath it.  A magnetic cannon ten thousand times stronger than nature gave it any right to be.
Both sides drew their weapons.  I don't know which fired first, or even if it mattered:  how many tonnes of antimatter would it take to match something that could squeeze the power of a sun from a gas ball barely wider than Jupiter?  Was Rorschach also resigned to defeat, had each side opted for a kamikaze strike on the other?
I don't know.  Big Ben got in the way just minutes before the explosion.  That's probably why I'm still alive.  Ben stood between me and that burning light like a coin held against the sun.
Theseus sent everything it could, until the last microsecond.  Every recorded moment of hand-to-hand combat, every last countdown, every last soul.  All the moves and all the vectors.  I have that telemetry.  I can break it down into any number of shapes, continuous or discrete.  I can transform the topology, rotate it and compress it and serve it up in dialects that any ally might be able to use.  Perhaps Sarasti was right, perhaps some of it is vital.
I don't know what any of it means.





Charybdis


"Species used to go extinct.  Now they go on hiatus."
—Deborah MacLennan, Tables of our Reconstruction

"You poor guy," Chelsea said as we went our separate ways.  "Sometimes I don't think you'll ever be lonely."  At the time I wondered why she sounded so sad.
Now, I only wish she'd been right.
I know this hasn't been a seamless narrative.  I've had to shatter the story and string its fragments out along a death lasting decades.  I live for only an hour of every ten thousand now, you see.   I wish I didn't have to.  If only I could sleep the whole way back, avoid the agony of these brief time-lapsed resurrections.
If only I wouldn't die in my sleep if I tried.  But living bodies glitter with a lifetime's accumulation of embedded radioisotopes, brilliant little shards that degrade cellular machinery at the molecular level.  It's not usually a problem.  Living cells repair the damage as fast as it occurs.  But my undead ones let those errors accumulate over time, and the journey home takes so much longer than the trip out:  I lie in stasis and corrode.  So the onboard kick-starts me every now and then to give my flesh the chance to stitch itself back together.
Occasionally it talks to me, recites system stats, updates me on any chatter from back home.  Mostly, though, it leaves me alone with my thoughts and the machinery ticking away where my left hemisphere used to be.  So I talk to myself, dictate history and opinion from real hemisphere to synthetic one:  bright brief moments of awareness, long years of oblivious decay between.  Maybe the whole exercise is pointless from the start, maybe no one's even listening.  
It doesn't matter.  This is what I do.
So there you have it:  a memoir told from meat to machinery.  A tale told to myself, for lack of someone else to take an interest.
Anyone with half a brain could tell it.

*

I got a letter from Dad today.  General delivery, he called it.  I think that was a joke, in deference to my lack of known address.  He just threw it omnidirectionally into the ether and hoped it would wash over me, wherever I was.
It's been almost fourteen years now.  You lose track of such things out here.
Helen's dead.  Heaven—malfunctioned, apparently.  Or was sabotaged.  Maybe the Realists finally pulled it off.  I doubt it, though.  Dad seemed to think someone else was responsible.  He didn't offer up any details.  Maybe he didn't know any.  He spoke uneasily of increasing unrest back home.  Maybe someone leaked my communiqués about Rorschach; maybe people drew the obvious conclusion when our postcards stopped arriving.  They don't know how the story ended.  The lack of closure must be driving them crazy.
But I got the sense there was something else, something my father didn't dare speak aloud.  Maybe it's just my imagination;  I thought he even sounded troubled by the news that the birth rate was rising again, which should be cause for celebration after a generation in decline.  If my Chinese Room was still in proper working order I'd know, I'd be able to parse it down to the punctuation.  But Sarasti battered my tools and left them barely functional.  I'm as blind now as any baseline.  All I have is uncertainty and suspicion, and the creeping dread that even with my best tricks in tatters, I might be reading him right.
I think he's warning me to stay away.

*

He also said he loved me.  He said he missed Helen, that she was sorry for something she did before I was born, some indulgence or omission that carried developmental consequences.  He rambled.  I don't know what he was talking about.  So much power my father must have had, to be able to authorize such a broadcast and yet waste so much of it on feelings.
Oh God, how I treasure it.  I treasure every word. 

*

I fall along an endless futile parabola, all gravity and inertia.  Charybdis couldn't reacquire the antimatter stream;  Icarus has either been knocked out of alignment or shut off entirely.  I suppose I could radio ahead and ask, but there's no hurry.  I'm still a long way out.  It will be years before I even leave the comets behind.
Besides, I'm not sure I want anyone to know where I am.
Charybdis doesn't bother with evasive maneuvers.  There'd be no point even if it had the fuel to spare, even if the enemy's still out there somewhere.  It's not as though they don't know where Earth is.
But I'm pretty sure the scramblers went up along with my own kin.  They played well.  I admit it freely.  Or maybe they just got lucky.  An accidental hiccough tickles Bates' grunt into firing on an unarmed scrambler; weeks later, Stretch & Clench use that body in the course of their escape.  Electricity and magnetism stir random neurons in Susan's head; further down the timeline a whole new persona erupts to take control, to send Theseus diving into Rorschach's waiting arms.  Blind stupid random chance.  Maybe that's all it was.
But I don't think so.  Too many lucky coincidences.  I think Rorschach made its own luck, planted and watered that new persona right under our noses, safely hidden—but for the merest trace of elevated oxytocin— behind all the lesions and tumors sewn in Susan's head.  I think it looked ahead and saw the uses to which a decoy might be put; I think it sacrificed a little piece of itself in furtherance of that end, and made it look like an accident.  Blind maybe, but not luck.  Foresight.  Brilliant moves, and subtle.
Not that most of us even knew the rules of the game, of course.  We were just pawns, really.  Sarasti and the Captain—whatever hybridized intelligence those two formed—they were the real players.  Looking back, I can see a few of their moves too.  I see Theseus hearing the scramblers tap back and forth in their cages; I see her tweak the volume on the Gang's feed so that Susan hears it too, and thinks the discovery her own.  If I squint hard enough, I even glimpse Theseus offering us up in sacrifice, deliberately provoking Rorschach to retaliation with that final approach.  Sarasti was always enamored of data, especially when it had tactical significance.  What better way to assess one's enemy than to observe it in combat?
They never told us, of course.  We were happier that way.  We disliked orders from machines.  Not that we were all that crazy about taking them from a vampire.
And now the game is over, and a single pawn stands on that scorched board and its face is human after all.  If the scramblers follow the rules that a few generations of game theorists have laid out for them, they won't be back.  Even if they are, I suspect it won't make any difference.
Because by then, there won't be any basis for conflict.
I've been listening to the radio during these intermittent awakenings.  It's been generations since we buried the Broadcast Age in tightbeams and fiberop, but we never completely stopped sowing EM throughout the heavens.  Earth, Mars, and Luna conduct their interplanetary trialog in a million overlapping voices.  Every ship cruising the void speaks in all directions at once.  The O'Neils and the asteroids never stopped singing.  The Fireflies might never have found us if they had.
I've heard those songs changing over time, a fast-forward time-lapse into oblivion.  Now it's mostly traffic control and telemetry.  Every now and then I still hear a burst of pure voice, tight with tension, just short of outright panic more often than not:  some sort of pursuit in progress, a ship making the plunge into deep space, other ships in dispassionate pursuit.  The fugitives never seem to get very far before their signals are cut off.
I can't remember the last time I heard music but I hear something like it sometimes, eerie and discordant, full of familiar clicks and pops.  My brainstem doesn't like it.  It scares my brainstem to death.
I remember my whole generation abandoning the real world for a bootstrapped Afterlife.  I remember someone saying Vampires don't go to Heaven.  They see the pixels.  Sometimes I wonder how I'd feel, brought back from the peace of the grave to toil at the pleasure of simpleminded creatures who had once been no more than protein.  I wonder how I'd feel if my disability had been used to keep me leashed and denied my rightful place in the world.
And then I wonder what it would be like to feel nothing at all, to be an utterly rational, predatory creature with meat putting itself so eagerly to sleep on all sides...

*

I can't miss Jukka Sarasti.  God knows I try, every time I come online.  He saved my life.  He — humanized me.  I'll always owe him for that, for however long I live; and for however long I live I'll never stop hating him for the same reason.   In some sick surrealistic way I had more in common with Sarasti than I did with any human.
But I just don't have it in me.  He was a predator and I was prey, and it's not in the nature of the lamb to mourn the lion.  Though he died for our sins, I cannot miss Jukka Sarasti.
I can empathize with him, though.  At long long last I can empathise, with Sarasti, with all his extinct kind.  Because we humans were never meant to inherit the Earth.  Vampires were.  They must have been sentient to some degree, but that semi-aware dream state would have been a rudimentary thing next to our own self-obsession.  They were weeding it out.  It was just a phase.  They were on their way.
The thing is, humans can look at crosses without going into convulsions.  That's evolution for you; one stupid linked mutation and the whole natural order falls apart, intelligence and self-awareness stuck in counterproductive lock-step for half a million years.  I think I know what's happening back on Earth, and though some might call it genocide it isn't really.  We did it to ourselves, really.  You can't blame predators for being predators.  We were the ones who brought them back, after all.  Why wouldn't they reclaim their birthright?
Not genocide.  Just the righting of an ancient wrong.
I've tried to take some comfort in that.  It's—difficult.  Sometimes it seems as though my whole life's been a struggle to reconnect, to regain whatever got lost when my parents killed their only child.  Out in the Oort, I finally won that struggle.  Thanks to a vampire and a boatload of freaks and an invading alien horde, I'm Human again.  Maybe the last Human.  By the time I get home, I could be the only sentient being in the universe.
If I'm even that much.  Because I don't know if there is such a thing as a reliable narrator.  And Cunningham said zombies would be pretty good at faking it.
So I can't really tell you, one way or the other.
You'll just have to imagine you're Siri Keeton.

Acknowledgments

Blindsight is my first novel-length foray into deep space—a domain in which I have, shall we say, limited formal education.  In that sense this book isn't far removed from my earlier novels:  but whereas I may have not known much about deep sea ecology either, most of you knew even less, and a doctorate in marine biology at least let me fake it through the rifters trilogy.  Blindsight, however, charts its course through a whole different kind of zero gee; this made a trustworthy guide that much more important.   So first let me thank Prof. Jaymie Matthews of the University of British Columbia:  astronomer, partygoer, and vital serial sieve for all the ideas I threw at him.  Let me also thank Donald Simmons, aerospace engineer and gratifyingly-cheap dinner date, who reviewed my specs for Theseus (especially of the drive and the Drum), and gave me tips on radiation and the shielding therefrom.  Both parties patiently filtered out my more egregious boners.  (Which is not to say that none remain in this book, only that those which do result from my negligence, not theirs.  Or maybe just because the story called for them.)  
David Hartwell, as always, was my editor and main point man at Evil Empire HQ.  I suspect Blindsight was a tough haul for both of us:  shitloads of essential theory threatened to overwhelm the story, not to mention the problem of generating reader investment in a cast of characters who were less cuddlesome than usual.  I still don't know the extent to which I succeeded or failed, but I've never been more grateful that the man riding shotgun had warmed up on everyone from Heinlein to Herbert.
The usual gang of fellow writers critiqued the first few chapters of this book and sent me whimpering back to the drawing board:  Michael Carr, Laurie Channer, Cory Doctorow, Rebecca Maines, David Nickle, John McDaid, Steve Samenski, Rob Stauffer and the late Pat York.  All offered valuable insights and criticisms at our annual island getaway; Dave Nickle gets singled out for special mention thanks to additional insights offered throughout the year, generally at ungodly hours.  By the same token, Dave is exempted from the familiar any-errors-are-entirely-mine schtick that we authors boilerplate onto our Acknowledgements.  At least some of the mistakes contained herein are probably Dave's fault.
Elisabeth Bear critiqued a semifinal draft in its entirety.  Profs. Dan Brooks and Deborah MacLennan, both of the University of Toronto, provided the intellectual stimulation of an academic environment without any of the political and bureaucratic bullshit that usually goes along with it.  I am indebted to them for litres of alcohol and hours of discussion on a number of the issues presented herein, and for other things that are none of your fucking business.  Also in the too-diverse-to-itemise category, André Breault provided a west-coast refuge in which I completed the first draft. Isaac Szpindel—the real one—  helped out, as usual, with various neurophys details, and Susan James (who also really exists, albeit in a slightly more coherent format) told me how linguists might approach a First Contact scenario.  Lisa Beaton pointed me to relevant papers in a forlorn attempt to atone for whoring her soul to Big Pharma.  Laurie Channer acted as general sounding board, and, well, put up with me.  For a while, anyway.  Thanks also to Karl Schroeder, with whom I batted around a number of ideas in the arena of sentience-vs.-intelligence.  Parts of Blindsight can be thought of as a rejoinder to arguments presented in Karl's novel Permanence;  I disagree with his reasoning at almost every step, and am still trying to figure out how we arrived at the same general endpoint.


Notes and References
 
Abridged references and remarks1, to try and convince you all I'm not crazy (or, failing that, to simply intimidate you into shutting up about it).  Read for extra credit.


A Brief Primer on Vampire Biology2

Homo sapiens vampiris was a short-lived Human subspecies which diverged from the ancestral line about 700,000 years BP.  Vampiris was more gracile than either neandertal or sapiens, although such differences were relatively minor since the lineage didn't persist long enough for great morphological divergence.  However, vampiris did differ radically from sapiens in biochemistry, neurology, and immunology.  Vampires showed heightened resistance to prion diseases3, for example (cannibalism carries with it a high risk of prionic infection4), as well as to a variety of helminth and anasakid parasites.  Hearing and vision were superior; vampire retinas were quadrochromatic, their fourth cone type being sensitive to near-infrared.  Grey matter was relatively "underconnected" due to a relative lack of interstitial white matter, forcing cortical modules to become self-contained and hypereffective, and leading to omnisavantic pattern-matching and analytical skills5.  
Most of these features can be traced back to a paracentric inversion on the Xq21.3 block of the X-chromosome6, the mutation that initially defined the subspecies.  It resulted in changes to genes coding for protocadherins (which are critical to nervous system development).  However, some of these cascade effects were deleterious.  Vampires lost the ability to code for ?-Protocadherin Y, whose genes are found exclusively on the hominid Y chromosome7.  Unable to synthesise this vital protein themselves, vampires had to obtain it from their food; thus, Human prey thus comprised an essential part of their diet, but a relatively slow-breeding one.  Normally this dynamic would be unsustainable:  vampires would predate humans to extinction, and then die off themselves for lack of essential nutrients.
Extended periods of lungfish-like dormancy8 (the "undead" state) developed in response, as a means of reducing vampires' energetic needs.   Vampires produced elevated levels of endogenous Ala-(D) Leuenkephalin (a mammalian hibernation-inducing peptide9) and dobutamine (which strengthens the heart muscle during periods on inactivity10).
Another deleterious effect was the "Crucifix Glitch"— a cross-wiring of normally-distinct receptor arrays in the visual cortex11, resulting in grand mal-like feedback seizures whenever the arrays processing vertical and horizontal stimuli fired simultaneously across a sufficiently large arc of the visual field.  Since intersecting right angles are virtually nonexistent in nature, natural selection did not weed out the Glitch until H. sapiens sapiens developed Euclidean architecture; by then, the trait had become fixed among vampires via genetic drift, and—suddenly denied access to its prey—the entire subspecies went extinct shortly after the dawn of recorded history.


Sleight of Mind

The Human sensorium is remarkably easy to hack.  Our eyes acquire such fragmentary input that the brain doesn't so much see the world as make an educated guess about it12,13.  "Improbable" stimuli, therefore tend to go unprocessed at the conscious level.  We simply ignore things that don't fit with our worldview. 
Yarbus first discovered the saccadal glitch in Human vision14, during the sixties.  Researchers have since made objects pop unnoticed in and out of the visual field, conducted interviews with hapless subjects who never realised that the person they started talking to was not the same person they finished talking to, and generally proven that the Human brain just fails to notice what happens around it15, 16, 17, 18. 
Most of the hallucinatory syndromes described herein are real, and summarised by Metzinger19, Wegner20, and/or Sacks21 .  Others (e.g. Grey Syndrome) are invented, but based on actual experimental evidence.  The judicious application of magnetic fields to the brain can allegedly provoke everything from religious rapture22 to the experience of alien abduction23.  Transcranial magnetic stimulation can change mood, induce blindness24, or target the speech centers25.  Memory and learning can be enhanced (or impaired), and the US Government is presently funding research into wearable TMS gear for—you guessed it— military purposes26.  
Sometimes electrical stimulation of the brain induces "alien hand syndrome"— the involuntary movement of the body against the will of the "person" allegedly in control27.  Other times it provokes equally involuntary movements, which subjects nonetheless insist they "chose" to perform despite overwhelming evidence to the contrary28.  Put this together with the fact that the body begins to act before the brain even "decides" to move29 (but see30, 31), and the whole concept of free will—despite the undeniable reality of the feeling—begins to look a bit silly, even outside the influence of alien artefacts.
Electromagnetic stimulation is not the only way to hack the brain.  Gross physical disturbances from tumors32 to tamping irons33 can turn normal people into psychopaths and pedophiles.  Spirit possession and rapture can be induced through the sheer emotional bump-and-grind of religious rituals20.  People even develop a sense of ownership of body parts that aren't theirs, grow convinced that a rubber hand is their real one34.  A prop limb, subtly manipulated, will convince us that we're doing one thing while in fact we're doing something else entirely35, 36.  
The latest tool in this arsenal is ultrasound: less invasive than electromagnetics, more precise than charismatic revival, it affects brain activity without any of those pesky electrodes or magnetic hairnets37.  In Blindsight it serves to explain why Rorschach's hallucinations persist in the presence of Faraday shielding— but Sony has already patented a machine which uses ultrasonics to implant "sensory experiences" directly into the brain38.  They're calling it an entertainment device with massive applications for online gaming.  Uh huh.  And if you can plant sights and sounds into someone's head from a distance, why not plant political beliefs and the irresistable desire for a certain brand of beer while you're at it?


Are We There Yet?

The "telematter" drive that gets our characters to the story is based on teleportation studies reported in Nature39, Science,40,41 Physical Review Letters42, and (more recently) everyone and their doge.g., 43.  (The specific idea of transmitting antimatter specs as a fuel template is, so far as I know, all mine.)   Plausible guesses for Theseus's travel itinerary were derived using The Relativistic Rocket44, maintained by John Baez; her use of magnetic fields as radiation shielding hails from research out of MIT45.
The undead state in which Theseus carries her crew is, of course, another iteration of the venerable suspended animation riff (although I'd like to think I've broken new ground by invoking vampire physiology as the mechanism).  Blackstone et al. have induced hibernation in mice by the simple expedient of exposing them to hydrogen sulfide46; this gums up their cellular machinery enough to reduce metabolism by 90%.  In light of this I considered rejigging the book 
to include mention of hydrogen sulfide, but ultimately decided that fart jokes would ruin the mood.


The Game Board

  Blindsight needed an astronomical object that was relatively local and large enough to sustain a superJovian magnetic field, yet small enough to remain undiscovered for the next seven or eight decades.  Yumiko Oasa has reported finding infrared emitters47, 48 — dimmer than brown dwarves, possibly more common49,50— that fit the bill.  Very little is known about them (some are skeptical of their very existence51), so I pilfered data from a variety of sources on gas giants52, 53, 54, 55, 56, 57, 58 and brown dwarves59, 60, 61, 62, 63,  64, 65, , 66, 67, 68, scaling up or down as necessary.  From a distance, the firing of Rorschach's ultimate weapon looks an awful lot like a supermassive flare recently seen erupting from a brown dwarf that should have been way too small to pull off such a trick69,70.


Scrambler Anatomy and Physiology

I am weary of humanoid aliens with bumpy foreheads, and of giant CGI insectoids that may look alien but who act at best like rabid dogs in chitin suits.  On the other hand, the same principles of natural selection will shape life wherever it evolves.  The challenge is thus to create an "alien" that lives up to the word, while remaining biologically plausible.
Scramblers are my first shot at that challenge— and given how much they resemble the brittle stars found in earthly seas, I may have crapped out on the whole unlike-anything-you've-ever-seen front, at least in terms of gross morphology.  Brittle stars even have something akin to the scrambler's distributed eyespot array, and scrambler reproduction— the budding of stacked newborns off a common stalk— takes its lead from jellyfish.  You can take the marine biologist out of the ocean, but...
Fortunately, scramblers become more alien the closer you look at them.  Cunningham remarks that nothing like their time-sharing motor/sensory pathways exists on Earth.  Our own "mirror neurons", however, come closest: they fire both when we act, and when we observe another performing the same action71, a characteristic cited in the evolution of both language and of consciousness72, 73, 74.  Further, motor-control and motor-awareness systems may share the same cortical wiring75.
On Earth, anything that relied solely on anaerobic ATP production never got past the single-cell stage.  Even though it's more efficient than our own oxygen-burning pathways, anaerobic metabolism is just too damn slow for multicellularity76.  Cunningham's proposed solution is simplicity itself.  (The catch is, you have to sleep for a few thousand years between shifts.)  Scaling down even further, quantum-duality effects of the kind used in Scrambler metabolism can exert significant impacts on biochemical reactions under physiological conditions at room temperature77; heavy-atom carbon tunnelling has been reported to speed up the rate of such reactions by as much as 152 orders of magnitude78.
And how's this for alien:  no genes.  The honeycomb example I used by way of analogy originally appeared in Darwin's little-known treatise79 (damn but I've always wanted to cite that guy); but more recently, a growing group of biologists are spreading the word that nucleic acids (in particular) and genes (in general) have been overrated as prerequisites to life80, 81.  Much biological complexity arises through the sheer physical and chemical interaction of its components82, 83, 84, 85.  Of course, you still need something to set up the initial conditions for those processes to emerge; that's where Rorschach's magnetic fields come in.  No candy-ass string of nucleotides would survive in that environment anyway.  
Nitpickers might say "Yeah, but without genes how do these guys evolve?  How to they adapt to novel environments?  How, as a species, do they cope with the unexpected?"  And if Robert Cunningham were here, he'd reply, "Half the immune system actively targets the other half.  It's not just the immune system, either; parts of the nervous system seem to be trying to, well, hack each other.  The whole organism's at war with itself on the tissue level, it's got some kind of cellular Red Queen thing happening.  Like setting up a colony of interacting tumors, and counting on fierce competition to keep any one of them from getting out of hand.  Serves the same role as sex and mutation does for us." And if you rolled your eyes at all that doubletalk, he might just blow smoke in your face and point out that your own synapses are shaped by a similar kind of intraorganismal natural selection86.  He might also refer to one immunologist's interpretation of exactly those concepts, as exemplified in (of all things) The Matrix Revolutions87 . 


Sentience/Intelligence

Here's the heart of the whole damn exercise.  Biggies first:  Metzinger's Being No One19 is the toughest book I've ever read (and there are still significant chunks of it I haven't), but it also contains some of the most mindblowing ideas I've encountered in fact or fiction.  Most authors are shameless bait-and-switchers when it comes to consciousness.  Pinker calls his book How the Mind Works88, then admits on page one "We don't understand how the mind works".  Koch writes The Quest for Consciousness:  A Neurobiological Approach89, in which he sheepishly sidesteps the whole issue of why neural activity should result in any kind of subjective awareness whatsoever.
Towering above such pussies, Metzinger takes the bull by the balls.  His "World-zero" hypothesis not only explains the subjective sense of self, but also why such an illusory first-person narrator would be an emergent property of certain cognitive systems in the first place.  I have no idea whether he's right— the man's way beyond me— but at least he addressed the real question that keeps us staring at the ceiling at three a.m., long after the last roach is spent.
 Less ambitious, more accessible, Wegner's The Illusion of Conscious Will20 doesn't deal with the nature of consciousness so much as with the nature of will, which Wegner thumbnails as "our mind's way of estimating what it thinks it did.".  And of course, Oliver Sacks21 was sending us memos from the edge of consciousness long before consciousness even had a bandwagon to jump on.
It might be easier to list the people who haven't taken a stab at "explaining" consciousness.  Theories run the gamut from diffuse electrical fields to quantum puppet-shows; consciousness has been "located" in the frontoinsular cortex and the hypothalamus and a hundred dynamic cores in between90,  91,  92, 93, 94, 95, 96, 97, 98, 99, 100.  (At least one theory101 suggests that while great apes and adult Humans are sentient, young Human children are not.  I admit to a certain fondness for this conclusion; if childen aren't nonsentient, they're certainly psychopathic).
But beneath the unthreatening, superficial question of what consciousness is floats the more functional question of what it's good for.  It's telling to note that the nonconscious mind usually works so well on its own that it actually employs a gatekeeper to prevent the conscious self from interfering in daily operations102, 103, 104.  (If the rest of your brain were conscious, it would probably regard you as the pointy-haired boss from Dilbert.)  Sentience isn't even necessary to develop a "theory of mind": you don't need to be self-reflective in order to track others' intentions97.  Norretranders declared outright that "Consciousness is a fraud"105.
Aesthetics might be an exception.  Aesthetics seem to require self-awareness—it might even be what got the whole sentience ball rolling in the first place.  When music is so beautiful it makes you shiver, that's your limbic reward circuitry kicking in:  the same circuitry that rewards you for fucking an attractive partner or gorging on sucrose106.  It's a hack, in other words; your brain has learned to get the reward without actually earning it through increased fitness88.  It feels good, and it fulfills us, and it makes life worth living.  But it also turns us inward and distracts us.  Those rats back in the sixties, the ones that learned to stimulate their own pleasure centers by pressing a lever:  remember them?  They pressed those levers with such addictive zeal that they forgot to eat.  They starved to death.  They died happy, but they died, without issue.  Their fitness went to Zero.
Aesthetics.  Sentience.  Extinction.
Which brings us to one last question, lurking way down in the anoxic zone:  the question of what consciousness costs.  Compared to nonconscious processing, self-awareness is slow and expensive102. (The premise of a separate, faster "emergency brain" lurking at the base of our primary one is taken from studies by Joe LeDoux, and others107, 108).   By way of comparison, consider the complex, lightning-fast calculations of savantes; those abilities are noncognitive109, and they owe their superfunctionality not to any overarching integration of mental processes but to relative neurological fragmentation5.  Even if sentient and nonsentient processes were equally efficient, the conscious awareness of visceral stimuli—by its very nature— distracts the individual from other threats and opportunities in its environment110.
But while many have described the various costs and drawbacks of sentience, few if any have taken the next step and wondered out loud if the whole damn thing isn't more trouble than it's worth.  Of course it is, people assume; otherwise natural selection would have weeded it out long ago.  And they're probably right.  I hope they are.  Blindsight is a thought experiment, a game of Just suppose.  Nothing more.
On the other hand, the dodos and the Steller sea cows could have used exactly the same argument to prove their own superiority, a thousand years ago:  if we're so unfit, why haven't we gone extinct?   Why?  Because natural selection takes time, and luck plays a role.  The game isn't over.  The game is never over; and so, neither can there be any winners.  There are only those who haven't yet lost.
Chimpanzees have a higher brain-to-body ratio than orangutans111, yet orangs consistently recognise themselves in mirrors while chimps do so only half the time112.  Gorillas don't self-recognise at all.  Similarly, those nonhuman species with the most sophisticated language skills are a variety of birds and monkeys—not the presumably-"more-sentient" great apes who are our closest relatives73, 113.  Such facts almost suggest that sentience itself could be a phase, something that orangutans haven't yet grown out of but which their more-advanced chimpanzee cousins are beginning to.
Of course, we don't fit this pattern.  If it even is a pattern.  We're outliers:  that's one of the points I'm making.
I bet vampires would fit it, though.


Miscellaneous Ambience (Background Details, Bad Wiring, and the Human Condition)

Siri Keeton radical hemispherectomy has been a common treatment for certain severe epilepsies for over fifty years114.   The maternal-response opioids that Helen Keeton used to kickstart mother-love in her damaged son was inspired by recent work on attachment-deficit disorders in mice115.  The multilingual speech patterns of Theseus' crew were taken from Graddol116, who suggests that a single "universal" scientific language would undesirably constrain the ways in which we view the world. 
The antecedent of Szpindel's and Cunningham's extended phenotypes exists today117.  The spliced prosthetics that allow them to synesthetically perceive output from their lab equipment hails from the remarkable plasticity of the brain's sensory cortices:  you can turn an auditory cortex into a visual one by simply splicing the optic nerve into the auditory pathways, if you do it early enough118, 119.  Bates' carboplatinum augments have their roots in the recent development of metal musculature120, 121.   I trawled The Gang of Four's linguistic jargon from a variety of sources73, 122, 123, 124.  Sascha's ironic denigration of TwenCen psychiatry hails from a pair of papers125, 126 that strip the mystique from cases of so-called multiple personality disorder. 
I thought it would be cool to  make one of the Gang a synesthete, reasoning that someone with cross-wired senses might have an advantage at deciphering the language of aliens with diffrtrmy sensory modalities; then, as I was putting "Blindsight" to bed, a paper appeared suggesting that synesthesias might be used to solve formal cognitive problems127.  This validates me, and I wish it happened more often128. 
The fibromyalgia variant that kills Chelsea was based on symptoms described by Kaplan et al.129.
And believe it or not, those screaming faces Sarasti used near the end of the book represent a very real form of statistical analysis:  Chernoff Faces130, which are more effective than the usual graphs and statistical tables at conveying the essential characteristics of a data set131.

    
Half Title
    
    
    
    
    
    
    Echopraxia
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

    

    
    Ad Card
    
    
    Tor Books by Peter Watts
    
    Starfish
    Maelstrom
    ?ehemoth: ?-Max
    ?ehemoth: Seppuku
    Blindsight
    Echopraxia
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

    
    
    Title Page
    
    

    
    Echopraxia
    
    
    
    Peter Watts
    
    
    


     A Tom Doherty Associates Book
    New York
    
    
    
    
    
    
    Copyright
    
    
    This is a work of fiction. All of the characters, organizations, and events portrayed in this novel are either products of the author’s imagination or are used fictitiously.
    
    ECHOPRAXIA
    
    Copyright © 2014 by Peter Watts
    
    All rights reserved.
    
    A Tor Book
    Published by Tom Doherty Associates, LLC
    175 Fifth Avenue
    New York, NY 10010
    
    www.tor-forge.com
    
    Tor® is a registered trademark of Tom Doherty Associates, LLC.
    
    ISBN 978-0-7653-2802-1 (hardcover)
    ISBN 978-1-4299-4806-7 (e-book)
    
    CIP DATA—TK
    
    Tor books may be purchased for educational, business, or promotional use. For information on bulk purchases, please contact Macmillan Corporate and Premium Sales Department at 1-800-221-7945, extension 5442, or write specialmarkets@macmillan.com.
    
    First Edition: August 2014
    
    Printed in the United States of America
    
    0 9 8 7 6 5 4 3 2 1
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    Dedication
    
    

    
    For the BUG.
    Who saved my life.
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

    
    
    Page 6
    Blank
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
<fmh>Contents
    
Prelude……………………………………………………………………000
Primitive…………………………………………………………………..000
Parasite…………………………………………………………………….000
Prey……………………………………………………………………....  000
Predator…………………………………………………………………..000
Prophet…………………………………………………………………….000
Postscript…………………………………………………………………..000

Acknowledgments…………………………………………………………000
Notes and References………………………………………………………000
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    Blank
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    Epigraph i
    
    <epi>We do not destroy religion by destroying superstition.
    <eps>—Cicero
    
    
    <epi>To concentrate on Heaven is to create Hell. 
    <eps>—Tom Robbins
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    

    

    
    
    
    Blank
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    Epigraph ii
    
    <epi>We climbed this hill. Each step up we could see farther, so of course we kept going. Now we’re at the top. Science has been at the top for a few centuries now. And we look out across the plain and we see this other tribe dancing around above the clouds, even higher than we are. Maybe it’s a mirage, maybe it’s a trick. Or maybe they just climbed a higher peak we can’t see because the clouds are blocking the view. So we head off to find out—but every step takes us downhill. No matter what direction we head, we can’t move off our peak without losing our vantage point. So we climb back up again. We’re trapped on a local maximum.
    But what if there is a higher peak out there, way across the plain? The only way to get there is bite the bullet, come down off our foothill and trudge along the riverbed until we finally start going uphill again. And it’s only then you realize: Hey, this mountain reaches way higher than that foothill we were on before, and we can see so much better from up here.
    But you can’t get there unless you leave behind all the tools that made you so successful in the first place. You have to take that first step downhill.
    
    <eps>—Dr. Lianna Lutterodt, “Faith and the Fitness Landscape”
     In Conversation, 2091
    
    
    
    
    
    Blank
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    Blank
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    2nd Half Title
    
    

    
    Echopraxia
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    Blank
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    
    


    
Prelude
     <epi>It is almost impossible systematically to constitute a natural moral law. Nature has no principles. She furnishes us with no reason to believe that human life is to be respected. 
     Nature, in her indifference, makes no distinction between good and evil. 
     <eps>—Anatole France
    
    A white room, innocent of shadow or topography. No angles: that’s crucial. No corners or intrusions of furniture, no directional lighting, no geometries of light and shadow whose intersection, from any viewpoint, might call forth the Sign of the Cross. The walls—wall, rather—was a single curved surface, softly bioluminescent, a spheroid enclosure flattened at the bottom in grudging deference to biped convention. It was a giant womb three meters across, right down to the whimpering thing curled up on the floor.
    A womb, with all the blood on the outside.
    Her name was Sachita Bhar and all that blood was in her head, too. By now they’d killed the cameras just like everything else but there was no way to take back the images from those first moments: the lounge, the Histo lab, even the broom closet for chrissakes, a grungy little cubby on the third floor where Gregor had hidden. Sachie hadn’t been watching when Gregor had been found. She’d been flipping through the channels, frantically scanning for life and finding only the dead, their insides all out now. By the time she’d cycled through to the closet feed the monsters had already been and gone.
    Gregor, who was in love with that stupid pet ferret of his. She’d shared an elevator with him this morning. She remembered the stripes on his shirt. Otherwise she’d have had no idea what to call the mess in the closet.
    She’d seen some fraction of the carnage before the cameras went down: friends and colleagues and rivals cut down without remorse or favoritism, their gutted remains sprawled across lab benches and workstations and toilet stalls. And with all those feeds running through the implants in her head—with all her access to all that ubiquitous surveillance—Sachita Bhar had not caught so much as a glimpse of the creatures who’d done this. Shadows, at most. A flicker of darkness cast by some solitary stalker from a blind spot in the camera’s eye. They’d done it all without ever being seen, without ever seeing each other. 
    They’d always been kept isolated. For their own good, of course: stick two vampires in the same room and their own hardwired territoriality would put them at each other’s throats in an instant. And yet they were working together, somehow. At least half a dozen, confined, incommunicado, acting in sudden precise concert. They’d done it all without ever meeting face-to-face—and even at the height of the slaughter, in those last moments before the cameras died, they had remained invisible. The whole massacre had happened from the corner of Sachie’s eye.
    How did they do it? How did they survive the angles?
    Someone else might have enjoyed the irony; she hid in a refuge for monsters, one of the few places in the whole damn building where they could open their eyes without risking a death sentence. Right angles were verboten here. This was where Achilles’ heels were put to the test, a cross-free zone where geometry was precisely controlled and neurological leashes optimized. Elsewhere, civilized geometry threatened on all sides: tabletops, windowpanes, a million intersections of appliance and architecture just waiting for the right viewpoint to send vampires into convulsions. Those monsters wouldn’t—
    —shouldn’t—
    —last an hour out there without the antiEuclideans that suppressed the Crucifix Glitch. Only here, in the white womb—where poor, stupid Sachita Bhar had run when the lights went out—could they dare to open unprotected eyes.
    And now one of them was in here with her.
    She couldn’t see it. Her own eyes were shut, squeezed tight against the butchery flashburned into her head. She heard no sound but the endless animal keening in her own throat. But something drank a little of the light falling on her face. The swirling red darkness inside her eyelids dimmed some infinitesimal, telltale fraction, and she knew.
    “Hello,” it said. 
    She opened her eyes. It was one of the females: Valerie, they’d named her, after some departmental chairman who’d retired the year before. Valerie the Vampire.
    Valerie’s eyes red-shifted the light and threw it back at her, blood-orange stars in a face flushed with aftermath. She towered over Sachie like an insectile statue, motionless, even her breathing imperceptible. Moments from death and with nothing better to do, some subroutine in Sachie’s head ticked off the morphometrics: such inhumanly long limbs, the attenuate heat-dissipating allometry of a metabolic engine running hot. Subtly jutting mandible,lupine as a hominid’s could be, to hold all those teeth. Stupid turquoise smock, smart-paper/telemetry composite weave: Valerie must have been scheduled for physio work today. Ruddy complexion, the bloody flash-flood vasodilation of the predator in hunting mode. And the eyes, those terrifying luminous pinpoints—
    Finally it registered: Contracted pupils.
    She’s not on Auntie U...
    Suddenly Sachie’s cross was out, last-ditch kill switch, the talisman everyone got on Day One along with their ID: empirically tested, proven in the crunch, redeemed by Science after uncounted centuries spent slumming as a religious fetish. Sachie held it up with sudden desperate bravado, thumbed the stud. Spring-loaded extensions shot from each tip and her little pocket totem was suddenly a meter on a side. 
    Thirty degrees of visual arc, Sachie. Maybe forty for the tough ones. Make sure it’s perpendicular to line of sight, the angles only work when they’re close to ninety degrees but once this little baby covers enough arc the visual cortex fries like a circuit in a shitstorm...
    Greg’s words.
    Valerie cocked her head and studied the artifact. Any second now, Sachie knew, this nightmare creature would collapse in a twitching mass of tetany and shorting synapses. That wasn’t faith; it was neurology.
    The monster leaned close, and didn’t even shiver. Sachita Bhar pissed herself.
    “Please,” she sobbed. The vampire said nothing.
    Words flooded out: “I’m sorry, I was never really part of it you know, I’m just a research associate, I’m just doing it for my degree that’s all, I know it’s wrong, I know it’s like, like slavery almost, I know that and it’s a shitty system, it’s a shitty thing we did to you but it wasn’t really me, do you understand? I didn’t make any of those decisions, I just came in afterward, I’m barely involved, it was just for my degree. And I, I can understand how you must feel, I can understand why you’d hate us I would too probably but please oh please, I’m just...I’m just a student...”
    After a while, still alive, she dared to look up again. Valerie was staring at some point just to the left and a thousand light-years away. She seemed distracted. But then they always seemed distracted, their minds running a dozen parallel threads simultaneously, a dozen perceptual realities each every bit as real as the one mere humans occupied.
    Valerie cocked her head as if listening to faint music. She almost smiled.
    “Please...,” Sachie whispered.
    “Not angry,” Valerie said. “Don’t want revenge. You don’t matter.”
    “You don’t—but...” Bodies. Blood. A building full of corpses and the monsters who’d made them. “What do you want, then? Anything, please, I’ll—”
    “Want you to imagine something: Christ on the Cross.”
    And of course, once the image had been incanted it was impossible not to imagine. Sachita Bhar had a few moments to wonder at the sudden spasms seizing her limbs, at the way her jaw locked into startling dislocation, at the feel of a thousand blood-hot strokes exploding like pinpricks across the back of her skull. She tried to close her eyes but it doesn’t matter what kind of light falls on the retina, that’s not vision. The mind generates its own images, much farther upstream, and there’s no way to shut those out.
    “Yes.” Valerie clicked thoughtfully to herself. “I learn.”
    Sachie managed to speak. It was the hardest thing she’d ever done, but she knew that was fitting; it was also the last thing she would ever do. So she summoned all her willpower, every shred of every reserve, every synapse that hadn’t already been commandeered for self-destruction, and she spoke. Because nothing else mattered any more, and she really wanted to know:
    “Learn...wha...”
    She couldn’t quite get it out. But the short-circuiting brain of Sachita Bhar managed to serve up one last insight anyway, amid the rising static: This is what the Crucifix Glitch feels like. This is what we do to them. This is…
    “Judo,” Valerie whispered.

<ct>Primitive

      
      <epi>Ultimately, all science is correlation. No matter how effectively it may use one variable to describe another, its equations will always ultimately rest upon the surface of a black box. (Saint Herbert might have put it most succinctly when he observed that all proofs inevitably reduce to propositions that have no proof.) The difference between Science and Faith, therefore, is no more and no less than predictive power. Scientific insights have proven to be better predictors than Spiritual ones, at least in worldly matters; they prevail not because they are true, but simply because they work.
      The Bicameral Order represents a stark anomaly in this otherwise consistent landscape. Their explicitly faith-based methodologies venture unapologetically into metaphysical realms that defy empirical analysis—yet they yield results with consistently more predictive power than conventional science. (How they do this is not known; our best evidence suggests some kind of rewiring of the temporal lobe in a way that amplifies their connection to the Divine.) 
      It would be dangerously naïve to regard this as a victory for traditional religion. It is not. It is a victory for a radical sect barely half a century old, and the cost of that victory has been to demolish the wall between Science and Faith. The Church’s concession of the physical realm informed the historic armistice that has allowed faith and reason to coexist to this day. One may find it heartening to see faith ascendant once again across the Human spectrum; but it is not our faith. Its hand still guides lost sheep away from the soulless empiricism of secular science, but the days in which it guided them into the loving arms of Our Savior are waning.
      
      <eps>—An Enemy Within: The Bicameral Threat to Institutional
      Religion in the Twenty-First Century (An Internal Report to
       the Holy See by the Pontifical Academy of Sciences, 2093)
    
    
<epi>All animals are under stringent selection pressure to be as stupid as they can get away with.
     <eps>—Pete Richerson and Robert Boyd
       
    
    Deep in the Oregon desert, crazy as a prophet, Daniel Brüks opened his eyes to the usual litany of death warrants.
    It had been a slow night. A half-dozen traps on the east side were offline—damn booster station must have gone down again—and most of the others were empty. But number eighteen had caught a garter snake. A sage grouse pecked nervously at the lens in number thirteen. The video feed from number four wasn’t working, but judging by mass and thermal there was probably a juvenile Scleroperus scrambling around in there. Twenty-three had caught a hare.
    Brüks hated doing the hares. They smelled awful when you cut them open—and these days, you almost always had to cut them open.
    He sighed and described a semicircle with his index finger; the feeds vanished from the skin of his tent. Headlines resolved in their wake, defaulting to past interests: Pakistan’s ongoing zombie problem; first anniversary of the Redeemer blowout; a sad brief obituary for the last wild coral reef.
    Nothing from Rho.
    Another gesture and the fabric lit with soft tactical overlays, skewed to thermal: public-domain real-time satellite imagery of the Prineville Reserve. His tent squatted in the center of the display, a diffuse yellow smudge: cold crunchy outer shell, warm chewy center. No comparable hotspots anywhere else in range. Brüks nodded to himself, satisfied. The world continued to leave him alone. 
    Outside, invisible in the colorless predawn, some small creature skittered away across loose rattling rock as he emerged. His breath condensed in front of him; frost crunched beneath his boots, bestowed a faint transient sparkle to the dusty desert floor. His ATB leaned against one of the scraggly larches guarding the camp, marshmallow tires soft and flaccid. 
    He grabbed mug and filter from their makeshift hook and stepped into the open, down a loose jumble of scree. The vestiges of some half-assed desert stream quenched his thirst at the foot of the slope, slimy and sluggish and doomed to extinction within the month. Enough to keep one large mammal watered in the meantime. Out across the valley the Bicamerals’ pet tornado squirmed feebly against a gray eastern sky but stars were still visible overhead, icy, unwinking, and utterly meaningless. Nothing up there tonight but entropy, and the same imaginary shapes that people had been imposing on nature since they’d first thought to wonder at the heavens.
    It had been a different desert fourteen years ago. A different night. But it had felt the same, until the moment he’d glanced up—and for a few shattering moments it had even been a different sky, robbed of all randomness. A sky where every star blazed in brilliant precise formation, where every constellation was a perfect square no matter how desperately human imaginations might strain. February 13, 2082. The night of First Contact: sixty-two thousand objects of unknown origin, clenching around the world in a great grid, screaming across the radio spectrum as they burned. Brüks remembered the feeling: as though he were witnessing some heavenly coup, a capricious god deposed and order restored.
    The revolution had only lasted a few seconds. The upstaged constellations had reasserted themselves as soon as those precise friction trails had faded from the upper atmosphere. But the damage had been done, Brüks knew. The sky would never look the same again. 
    That’s what he’d thought at the time, anyway. That’s what everyone had thought. The whole damn species had come together in the wake of that common threat, even if they didn’t know what it was exactly, even if it hadn’t actually threatened anything but Humanity’s own self-importance. The world had put its petty differences aside, spared no expense, thrown together the best damn ship the twenty-first century could muster. They’d crewed it with expendable bleeding-edgers and sent them off along some best-guess bearing, carrying a phrase book that spelled take me to your leader in a thousand languages.
    The world had been holding its breath for over a decade now, waiting for the Second Coming. There’d been no encore, no second act. Fourteen years is a long time for a species raised on instant gratification. Brüks had never considered himself a great believer in the nobility of the Human spirit but even he had been surprised at how little time it took for the sky to start looking the same as it always had, at the speed with which the world’s petty differences returned to the front page. People, he reflected, were like frogs: take something out of their visual field, and they’d just—forget it.
    The Theseus mission would be well past Pluto by now. If it had found anything, Brüks hadn’t heard about it. For his part, he was sick of waiting. He was sick of life on hold, waiting for monsters or saviors to make an appearance. He was sick of killing things, sick of dying inside.
    Fourteen years.
    He wished the world would just hurry up and end.
    
    <#>
    
     He spent the morning as he’d spent every other for the past two months: running his traplines and poking the things inside, in the faint hope of finding some piece of nature left untwisted.
    The clouds were already closing in by sunrise, before his bike had soaked up a decent charge; he left it behind and ran the transects on foot. It was almost noon by the time he got to the hare, only to find that something had beaten him to the punch. The trap had been torn open and its contents emptied by some other predator who’d lacked even the good grace to leave a blood spatter behind for analysis.
    The garter snake was still slithering around in number eighteen, though: a male, one of those brown-on-brown morphs that vanished against the dirt. It writhed in Brüks’s grasp, clenched around his forearm like a scaly tentacle; its scent glands smeared stink across his skin. Brüks drew a few microliters of blood without much hope, plugged them into the barcoder on his belt. He swigged from his canteen while the device worked its magic.
    Far across the desert the monastery’s tornado had swollen to three times its predawn size, pumped by the midday heat. Distance reduced it to a brown thread, an insignificant smoky smudge; but get too close to that funnel and you’d end up scattered over half the valley. Just the year before, some Ugandan vendetta theocracy had hacked a transAt shuttle out of Dartmouth, sent it through a vortex engine on the outskirts of Johannesburg. Not much but rivets and teeth had come out the other side.
    The barcoder meeped in plaintive surrender: too many genetic artifacts for a clean read. Brüks sighed, unsurprised. The little machine could tag any gut parasite from the merest speck of shit, ID any host species from the smallest shred of pure tissue—but pure tissue was so hard to come by, these days. There was always something that didn’t belong. Viral DNA, engineered for the greater good but too indiscriminate to stay on target. Special marker genes, designed to make animals glow in the dark when exposed to some toxin the EPA had lost interest in fifty years before. Even DNA computers, custom-built for a specific task and then tramped carelessly into wild genotypes like muddy footprints on a pristine floor. Nowadays it seemed like half the technical data on the planet were being stored genetically. Try sequencing a lung fluke and it was even money whether the base pairs you read would code for protein or the technical specs on the Denver sewer system.
    It was okay, though. Brüks was an old man, a field man from a day when people could tell what they were looking at by—well, by looking at it. Check the chin shields. Count the fin rays, the hooks on the scolex. Use your eyes, dammit. At least if you screw up you’ve only got yourself to blame, not some dumb-ass machine that can’t tell the difference between cytochrome oxidase and a Shakespearean sonnet. And if the things you’re trying to ID happen to live inside other things, you kill the host. You cut it open. 
    Brüks was good at that, too. He’d never got around to liking it much, though.
    Now he whispered to his latest victim—“Shhh...sorry.. it won’t hurt, I promise...”—and dropped it into the kill sack. He’d found himself doing that a lot lately, murmuring meaningless comforting lies to victims who couldn’t possibly understand what he was saying. He kept telling himself to grow up. In all the billions of years that life had been iterating on this planet, had any predator ever tried to comfort its prey? Had “natural” death ever been so quick and painless as the killings Dan Brüks inflicted for the greater good? And yet it still bothered him to see those small diffuse shadows flopping and squirming behind the translucent white plastic, to hear the soft thumps and hisses as simple minds tried to drive bodies, suddenly and terrifyingly unresponsive, toward some kind of imaginary escape.
    At least these deaths served a purpose, some constructive end transcending the disease or predation that nature would have inflicted. Life was a struggle to exist at the expense of other life. Biology was a struggle to understand life. And this particular bit of biology, this study of which he was author, principle, and sole investigator—this was a struggle to use biology to help the very populations he was sampling. These deaths were the closest that Darwin’s universe would ever come to altruism.
    And that, said the little voice that always seemed to boot up at times like this, is so much shit. The only thing you’re struggling to do is wring a few more publications out of your grant before the funding dries up. Even if you nailed down every change inflicted on every clade over the past hundred years, even if you quantified species loss down to the molecules, it wouldn’t matter. 
     Nobody cares. The only thing you’re struggling against is reality.
    That voice had become his constant companion over the years. He let it rant. Either way, he told it after it had run down, we’re a shitty biologist. And while his own guilty plea came easily enough, he could not bring himself to feel shame on that account.
    
    <#>
    
    It had stopped being a snake by the time he got back to camp. He stretched the limp and lifeless remains along the dissecting tray. Four seconds with the scasers and it was gutted, throat to cloaca; twenty more and the GI and respiratory tracts floated in separate watch glasses. The intestine would have the heaviest parasite load; Brüks loaded the GI tract into the ’scope and got to work. 
    Twenty minutes later, a retinue of flukes and cestodes only half-cataloged, something exploded in the distance.
    That’s what it sounded like, anyway: the soft muffled whoompf of far-off ordinance. Brüks rose from his work, panned the desert between spindly gnarled trunks.
    Nothing. Nothing. Noth—
    Oh, wait...
    The monastery.
    He grabbed his goggles off the ATB and zoomed in. The tornado was the first thing to draw his eye—
    —That thing’s going pretty strong for so late in the day—
    —but off to the right, directly over the monastery itself, a puff of dark brown smoke roiled and drifted and dissipated in the lowering light.
    The building didn’t seem to be damaged, though. At least, none of the façades he could see.
    What are they doing over there?
    Physics, officially. Cosmology. High-energy stuff. But it was all supposed to be theoretical; as far as Brüks knew the Bicameral Order didn’t perform actual experiments. Of course, hardly anyone did, these days. It was machines that scanned the heavens, machines that probed the space between atoms, machines that asked the questions and designed the experiments to answer them. All that was left for mere meat, apparently, was navel-gazing: to sit in the desert and contemplate whatever answers those machines served up. Although most still preferred to call it analysis.
    A hive mind that spoke in tongues: that was how the Bicamerals did it, supposedly. Some kind of bioradio in their heads, a communal corpus callosum: electrons jiggling around in microtubules, some kind of quantum-entanglement thing. Completely organic to get around the ban on B2B interfaces. A spigot that poured many minds into one on command. They flowed together and called down the Rapture, rolled around the floor and drooled and ululated while their acolytes took notes, and somehow they ended up rewriting the Amplituhedron. 
    There was supposed to be some rational explanation to justify the mumbo jumbo. Left-hemisphere pattern-matching subroutines amped beyond recognition; the buggy wetware that made you see faces in clouds or God’s wrath in thunderstorms, tweaked to walk some fine line between insight and pareidolia. Apparently there were fundamental insights to be harvested along that razor’s edge, patterns that only the Bicamerals could distinguish from hallucination. That was the story, anyway. It sounded like utter bullshit to Brüks.
    Still, you couldn’t argue with the Nobels. 
    Maybe they had some kind of particle accelerator over there after all. They had to be doing something that sucked a lot of energy; nobody used an industrial vortex engine to run kitchen appliances.
    From behind, the metallic tinkle of displaced instruments. Brüks turned. 
    His scasers lay in the dirt. On the bench above them the gutted snake watched him upside-down from its dissecting tray, forked tongue flickering. 
    Nerves, Brüks told himself.
    The discarded carcass shivered on its back, as if the gash down its belly had let in the cold. Flaps of tissue rippled along either edge of that wound, a slow peristaltic wave undulating along the length of the body.
    Galvanic response. That’s all it is.
    The snake’s head lurched up over the edge of the tray. Glassy, unblinking eyes looked this way and that. The tongue, red-black, black-red, tasted the air.
    The animal crawled from the pan.
    It wasn’t having an easy time of it. It kept trying to roll and crawl on its belly but it didn’t have a belly, not any more. The ventral scales that would have pushed it along, the muscles beneath had been sliced apart, every one. And so the creature would manage a half twist every now and then, and fail, and resort to crawling on its back: eyes wide, tongue flicking, insides emptied.
    The snake reached the edge of the bench, feebly wavered a moment, dropped into the dust. Brüks’s boot came down on its head. He ground it deep against the rocky soil until there was nothing left but a moist sticky clot in the dirt. The rest of the creature writhed, its muscles jumping to the beat of nerves jammed with noise and no signal. But at least there was nothing left that could possibly please-God feel.
    Reptiles were not especially fragile creatures. More than once Brüks had found rattlesnakes on the road hours from the nearest vehicle, spines crushed, fangs shattered, heads reduced to bloody paste—still moving, still crawling for the ditch. The kill sack was supposed to prevent that kind of protracted agony. You turned the animal’s own metabolism against it, let lungs and capillaries carry the poison to every cell of every tissue, bringing a quick and painless and—most of all—a complete death, so that it would not wake up and fucking look at you, and try to escape, an hour after you’d scraped its insides away.
    Of course there were zombies in the world now. Vampires too, for that matter. But the twenty-first century’s undead were strictly Human. There was no reason why anyone would want to build a zombie snake. This had to be another contamination artifact; some accidental genetic hack that shut down the MS receptor sites, maybe triggered a rogue suite of motor commands. Had to be.
    Still.
    He’d really hoped the ghosts would be easier to handle out here.
    
    <#>
    
    There weren’t nearly as many ghosts in the desert, for one thing. For another, none of them were human. Sometimes he wished he could feel half as much for the thousands of people he’d killed.
    Of course, basic biology explained that particular double standard as well. He hadn’t had to face any of his human victims, hadn’t looked into their eyes, hadn’t been there when they’d died. The gut was not a long-range organ. Its grasp of culpability degraded exponentially with distance; there’d been so many arcane degrees separating the actions of Daniel Brüks from their consequences that conscience itself entered the realm of pure theory. Besides, he’d hardly acted alone; the guilt diffused across the whole team. And their intentions, at least, had been beyond reproach.
    Nobody had blamed them, not out loud, not really. Not at first. You don’t pass judgment on the unwitting hammer used to bash in someone’s skull. Brüks’s work had been perverted by others intent on bloodshed; the guilt was theirs, not his. But those perpetrators remained uncaught and unpunished, and so many had needed closure in the meantime. And the distance between How could they and How could you let them was so much smaller than Brüks had ever imagined.
    No charges had been pressed. It wasn’t even enough to revoke his tenure. As it turned out, it was only enough to wear out his welcome on campus.
    Nature, though. Nature always welcomed him. She passed no judgments, didn’t care about right or wrong, guilt or innocence. She only cared about what worked and what didn’t. She welcomed everyone with the same egalitarian indifference. You just had to play by her rules, and expect no mercy if things didn’t go your way.
    And so Dan Brüks had put in for sabbatical and filed his agenda, and headed into the field. He’d left behind his sampling drones and artificial insects, packed no autonomous tech to rub his nose in the obsolescence of human labor. A few had watched him go, with relief; others kept their eyes on the sky. He left them, too. His colleagues would forgive him, or they wouldn’t. The aliens would return, or they wouldn’t. But Nature would never turn him away. And even in a world where every last sliver of natural habitat was under siege, there was no shortage of deserts. They’d been growing like slow cancer for a hundred years or more.
    Daniel Brüks would go into the welcoming desert, and kill whatever he found there.
    
    <#>
    
    He opened his eyes to the soft red glow of panicking machinery. A third of the network had just died in his sleep. Five more traps went down as he watched: a booster station, suddenly offlined. Twenty-two beeped plaintively a moment later—proximate heat trace, big, man-size even—and dropped off the map. 
    Instantly awake, Brüks played the logs. The network was going down from west to east, each dead node another footfall in a growing trail of dark ragged footprints stomping across the valley.
    Heading directly for him.
    He pulled up the satcam thermals. The remains of the old 380 ran like a thin vein along the northern perimeter, yesterday’s stale sunshine seeping from cracked asphalt. Diaphanous thermals and microclimatic hot spots, dying since nightfall, flickered at the threshold of visibility. Nothing else but the yellow nimbus of his own tent at center stage.
    Twenty-one reported sudden warmth, and disappeared.
    Cameras lurked here and there along the traplines. Brüks had never found much use for them but they’d come bundled as part of the package. One sat on a booster that happened to be line of sight to number nineteen. He brought it up: StarlAmp painted the nighttime desert in blues and whites, a surrealistic moonscape full of contrast. Brüks panned the view—
    —and almost missed it: a slither of motion from stage right, an amplified blur. Something that moved faster than anything Human had any right to. The camera was dead before number nineteen even felt the heat.
    The booster went down. Another dozen feeds died in an instant. Brüks barely noticed. He was staring at that last frozen frame, feeling his gut clench and his bowels turn to ice.
    Faster than a man, and so much less. And just a little bit colder inside.
    The field sensors weren’t sensitive enough to register that difference, of course. To see the truth from heat signatures alone you’d need to look inside the very head of your target, to squint until you could see deltas of maybe a tenth of a degree. You’d look at the hippocampus, and see that it was dark. You’d listen to the prefrontal cortex, and hear that it was silent. And then maybe you’d notice all that extra wiring, the force-grown neural lattices connecting midbrain to motor strip, the high-speed expressways bypassing the anterior cingulate gyrus—and those extra ganglia clinging like tumors to the visual pathways, fishing endlessly for the telltale neural signatures of seek and destroy.
    It would be a lot easier to spot those differences in visible light: Just look into the eyes, and see nothing at all looking back. Of course, if it ever got that close you’d be dead already. It wouldn’t leave you time to beg. It wouldn’t even understand your pleas. It would simply kill you, if that’s what it had been told to do, more efficiently than any conscious being because there was nothing left to get in the way: no second thoughts, no pulled punches, not even the basic glucose-sucking awareness of its own existence. It was stripped down to pure reptile, and it was dedicated.
    Less than a kilometer away, now.
    Something inside Daniel Brüks split down the middle. One half clamped its hands over its ears and denied everything—what the fuck why would anyone must be some kind of mistake—but the other remembered the universal human fondness for scapegoats, the thousands who’d died thanks to dumb ol’ Backdoor Brüks, the odds that at least one of those victims might have been survived by next of kin with the resources to set a military-grade zombie on his trail.
    How could they.
    How could you let them...
    The ATB hissed beneath him as its tires inhaled. The charge cord pulled him briefly off balance before tearing free. He plunged through a gap in the trees and down the scree, skidding sideways: hit the base of the slope and the desert spun around him, slimy and frictionless. The stream nearly took him out right there. Brüks fought for control as the bike one-eightied, but those marvelous marshmallow tires kept him miraculously upright. Then he was racing east across the fractured valley floor.
    Sagebrush tore at him as he passed. He cursed his own blindness; these days, no self-respecting grad student would be caught dead in the field without rattlesnake receptors in their eyes. But Brüks was an old man, baseline, night-blind. He didn’t even dare use the headlamp. So he hurtled through the night, smashing through petrified shrubs, bucking over unseen outcroppings of bedrock. He fumbled one-handed through the bike’s saddlebags, came up with the gogs, slapped them over his eyes. The desert sprang into view, green and grainy.
    0247, the goggles told him from the corner of his eye. Three hours to sunrise. He tried pinging his network but if any part of it remained alive, it was out of range. He wondered if the zombie had made it to camp yet. He wondered how close it had come to catching him.
    Doesn’t matter. Can’t catch me now, motherfucker. Not on foot. Not even undead. You can kiss my ass good-bye.
    Then he checked the charge gauge and his stomach dropped away all over again.
    Cloudy skies. An old battery, a year past its best-before. A charging blanket that hadn’t been cleaned in a month.
    The ATB had ten kilometers in it. Fifteen, tops.
    He braked and brought it around in a spray of dirt. His own trail extended behind him, an unmistakable line of intermittent carnage wrought upon the desert floor: broken plants, sun-cracked tiles of ancient lakebed crushed in passing. He was running but he wasn’t hiding. As long as he stayed on the valley floor, they’d be able to track him.
    Who, exactly?
    He switched from StarlAmp to infrared, zoomed the view.
    That.
    A hot tiny spark leapt against a distant slope, right about where his camp would be.
    Closer, though. And closing fast. That thing could run.
    Brüks swung the bike around and kicked it back into gear. He almost didn’t notice the second spark sweeping across his field of vision, it was so faint.
    He saw the third clearly enough, though. And the fourth. Too distant to make out shapes on thermal, but all hot as humans. All closing.
    Five, six, seven...
    Shit.
    They were fanned out along the valley as far as he could see.
    What did I do, what did I do, don’t they know it was an accident? It wasn’t even me, for chrissakes, I didn’t kill anyone, I just—left the door open...
    Ten kilometers. Then they’d be on him like ravenous wolves. 
    The ATB leapt forward. Brüks pinged 911: nothing. ConSensus was live enough but deaf to his pleas; somehow he could surf but not send. And his pursuers still weren’t showing up on satellite thermal; as far as the skeyes could see he was alone down here with the microweather and the monastery.
    The monastery.
    They’d be online. They’d be able to help. At the very least the Bicamerals lived behind walls. Anything was better than fleeing naked through the desert.
    He aimed for the tornado. It writhed in his enhanced sight, a distant green monster nailed to the earth. Its roar carried across the desert as it always did, faint but omnipresent. For a moment, Brüks heard something strange in that sound. The monastery resolved in the gogs, huddling in the shadow of the great engine. A myriad pinpoint stars burned there against a low jumble of stepped terraces, almost painfully bright. 
    Three in the morning, and every window was ablaze.
    Not so faint anymore: the vortex roared like an ocean now, its volume rising imperceptibly with each turn of the wheels. It was no longer stuck to the horizon. StarlAmp turned it into a pillar of fire, big enough to hold up the sky or to tear it down. Brüks craned his neck: over a kilometer away and still the funnel seemed to lean over him. Any second now it would break free. Any second it would leap from the ground and slam back down, there or there or right fucking here like the finger of some angry god, and it would rip the world apart wherever it touched.
    He stayed on course even though the monster ahead couldn’t possibly be made of air and moisture, couldn’t possibly be anything so—so soft. It was something else entirely, some insane Old Testament event horizon that chewed up the very laws of physics. It caught the glow from the monastery, trapped that light and shredded it and spun it together with everything else that fell within reach. A small gibbering thing inside Daniel Brüks begged him to turn back, knew that the creatures stalking him couldn’t be worse than this, because whatever they were they were only the size of men but this, this was the very wrath of God.
    But that hesitant little voice spoke again, and this time the question lingered: Why is this thing running so hard?
    It shouldn’t have been. Vortex engines never really stopped, but at night they weakened in the cooling air, diffused and idled until the rising sun brought them back to full strength. To keep a funnel this size running so hot, so late at night—that would almost draw more energy than it yielded. The vapor from the cooling cells would have to be verging on live steam—and now Brüks was close enough to hear something else against the jet-engine roar, a faint creaking counterpoint of great metal blades, twisting past their normative specs...
    The monastery lights went out.
    It took a moment for his goggles to amp back up; but in that moment of pure, illuminating darkness Daniel Brüks finally saw himself for the fool he was. For the first time he saw the pinpoint heatprints ahead of him, closing from the east as well as from behind. He saw forces powerful enough to hack surveillance satellites in geostationary orbit, but somehow unable to blind his antique Telonics network to the same heatprints. He saw a military automaton, ruthless as a shark, fast as a superconductor, betraying its own approach from kilometers away when it could have avoided his traplines entirely and killed him in his sleep.
    He saw himself from high overhead, stumbling across someone else’s game board: caught in a net that closed around but not on him.
    They didn’t even know I was here. They’re after the Bicamerals.
    He pulled to a stop. The monastery loomed fifty meters ahead, low and black against the stars. All windows abruptly shuttered, all approaches suddenly dark, it rose from the landscape as though born of it: a pile of deep rock strata breaching the surface of the world. The tornado loomed beyond like a whirling gash in space-time, barely a hundred meters on the other side. The sound of its rage filled the world.
    On all sides, candles closed in the darkness. 
    0313, his goggles reminded him. Less than an hour ago he’d been asleep. It wasn’t nearly long enough to come to terms with your own imminent death.
    YOU ARE IN DANGER, the gogs told him helpfully.
    Brüks blinked. The little red letters persisted, hovering off at the corner of his eye where the chrono readout should be.
    COME ON THEN. DOOR’S OPEN.
    He looked past the command line, panned across the darkened façades of the monastery. There, ground level: just to the left of a broad staircase that underscored the main entrance. An opening, barely big enough for a man. Something burned there at body temperature. It had arms and legs. It waved. 
    MOVE YOUR ASS BRÜKS YOU SELF-ABSORBED IDIOT.
    SEALING ENTRANCE IN 	15S
    				14S
    				13S...
    Brüks moved his self-absorbed idiot ass.
     <tepi>For they have sown the wind, and they shall reap the whirlwind.
     <teps>—Hosea 8:7
    
    Inside, the darkness was bright chaos.
    Human heat signatures flickered across Brüks’s goggles at point-blank range, coruscations of false color in frantic motion. The heat of their passing painted the surroundings with fainter washes of red and yellow: rough-hewn walls, a flat dead light panel for a ceiling, a floor that yielded unexpectedly beneath his feet like some ungodly hybrid of rubber and flesh. Off in an indeterminate distance, something stuttered and wailed; here in the hallway the human rainbows moved with silent urgency. The woman who’d invited him in—a petite writhing heatprint no more than 160 centimeters tall—grabbed his hand and pulled him forward: “I’m Lianna. Stay close.”
    He followed, switching the gogs to StarlAmp. The heatprints vanished; bright greenish stars moved in the void left behind, always in pairs, binary constellations jostling and blinking in the dark. A word popped into his head: luciferin. Photophores in the retinas. 
    These people had eyes that doubled as flashlights. Brüks had once known a grad student with similar augments. Sex had been—disquieting, in the dark.
    His guide threaded him through the starfield. That distant wailing rose and fell, rose and fell; not words exactly, but syllables at least. Clicks and cries and diphthongs in the dark. Bright eyes rose before him, seething with cold blue light. Amplified photons limned a gray face full of lines and angles. Brüks tried to steer his way around but that face blocked his way, eyes glowing with such furious intensity that his goggles had to dial back the amplification to almost nothing.
    “Gelan,” the face croaked. “Thofe tessrodia.”
    Brüks tried to take a step back; bumped into traffic, rebounded.
    “Eptroph!” cried the face, as the body beneath gave way.
    Lianna pushed him sideways into the wall—“Stay right there”—and dropped to the floor. Brüks switched back to thermal. The rainbows returned. Brüks’s assailant was on his back, heat sig bright as a solar flare, muttering nonsense. His fingers fluttered as if stabbing an invisible keyboard; his left foot tapped an agitated tattoo against the elastic flooring. Lianna cradled his head in her lap and spoke to him in the same incomprehensible tongue.
    The chronic background roar of the vortex engine rose subtly in pitch. Stone trembled at Brüks’s back. 
    A hot bright figure appeared down the corridor, swimming against the stream. Within moments it had reached them; Brüks’s guide passed her charge to the newcomer and was on her feet in an instant. “Let’s go.”
    “What was—”
    “Not here.”
    A side door. A flight of stairs, sheathed in the same rubbery skin that turned their footsteps into soft squeaks. It corkscrewed down through cooling bedrock that dimmed with each step in the goggles’ sights, but that compact body glowed like a beacon ahead of him. Suddenly the world was silent again but for their own footsteps and the distant, almost subsonic thrumming of the vortex engine.
    “What’s going on?” Brüks asked.
    “Oh. Mahmood.” Lianna glanced back, her eyes bright garish blobs, her mouth a crimson slash of heat. “Can’t always control when the rapture hits, much less which node. Not the most convenient thing in the world but you don’t want to miss the insights, you know? Could be time travel, for all we know. Could be a cure for golem.”
    “You understood what he was saying.”
    “Kinda. It’s what I do, when I’m not bringing lost sheep in from the desert.”
    “You’re a synthesist?” Jargonaut was the street name. Glorified translators, charged with bringing esoteric transhuman tablets down from the mountain, carved in runes simple enough for pitiful baseline Humans to half-understand. 
    Rhona had called them Moses mammals, back when she’d been in the world.
    But Lianna was shaking her head. “Not exactly. More of a—you’re a biologist, right? Synthesists would be rats. I’m more of a koala bear.”
    “Specialist.” Brüks nodded. “Narrower niche.”
    “Exactly.”
    A faint orange stain appeared on the thermoptics: warmth from below.
    “And you know who I am because…”
    “We’re on the bleeding edge of theistic virology here. You think we don’t know how to access a public database?”
    “I just thought you’d have better things to look up when you were being attacked by zombies.”
    “We keep an eye on the neighborhood, Dr. Brüks.”
    “Yeah, but what—”
    She stopped. Brüks nearly ran into her, then realized they’d reached the bottom of the stairs. Bright heat spilled around a corner dead ahead; Lianna turned and tapped his goggles. “You won’t be needing those.”
    He pushed them onto his forehead. The world reverted to a dim wash of blues and grays. The rough stone to his left broke the feeble ambient light into jagged fragments; to his right the wall was smooth gray metal.
    Lianna was already past him, heading back up the stairs. “I gotta go. You can watch from down here.”
    “But—”
    “Don’t touch anything!” she called back, and was gone. 
    He stepped around the corner. The ceiling panels here were as dead and dark as every other he’d seen in this place. The room—really, more of a cul-de-sac—was lit solely by a band of smart paint covering the far wall from waist-height to ceiling. It glowed with a haphazard collage of tactical displays ranging from hand-size to two meters across. Some of the feeds were coarse green mosaics; others rendered images hi-res and razor-sharp.
    A man in a loose tan coverall paced back and forth before the displays, at least two meters from his fuzzy slippers (slippers?) to the cropped salt-and-pepper thicket on his head. He spared a glance as Brüks approached, muttered “Glas-not,” and turned back to the welter of intel. 
    Great.
    Lianna the koala had told him he could watch, though. He stepped forward and tried to make sense of the chaos.
    Upper-left: a satellite view so crisp it nearly hurt his eyes. The monastery sat dead center, a bull’s-eye on the board, aglow with telltale thermal emissions. But it was the only hot spot in the whole window; whatever orbital eye he was looking through had been precisely blinded to all those other heatprints closing in the darkness. Brüks reached for the display, his fingers set to zoom the mag; a grunt and a glare from the slippered monk and he desisted.
    So much for orbital surveillance. The monastery had its own cameras though, judging by the mix of StarlAmp and thermal windows looking out across the desert. They painted the nightscape in palettes from every band of the visible spectrum, cool blues and rubies intense as lasers, color schemes so chaotic Brüks wondered whether they were really functional or just a reflection of some deviant bicameral aesthetic. Candles glowed in each of those windows, and they all looked the same.
    Four klicks out, and closing fast.
    Something sparkled on one of the displays, a tiny bright sundog in the dead of night. The image flared a moment; bright electronic snow fuzzed the display. A brief, bright nova. Then a dark dead hole in the wall, NO SIGNAL flashing from its center. 
    The monk’s fingers flew across the paint, calling up keyboards, zooming displays. Windows sprouted, panned brief landscapes, evaporated in turn. Three of those views sparked and died before the Bicameral had the chance to retire them gracefully.
    They’re taking out our cameras, Brüks realized, and wondered distantly when he had started to think of these rapture-stricken deviants as part of we. 
    Less than three and a half kilometers, now. 
    A new set of windows bloomed across the wall. The pictures flickering in these frames were grainier than the others, desaturated, almost monochrome. And while they too panned the desert, there was something about those views, something different yet familiar—
    There. Third window over: a tiny monastery hunkered on the horizon, a tiny vortex engine. This camera was looking back from way the hell across the desert. 
    That’s my network, Brüks realized. My cameras. I guess the zombies left some alive after all... 
    Brother Slippers had tapped into a half dozen of them, zoomed and cycled through each in turn. Brüks wasn’t sure how useful they’d be: cheap off-the-shelf things, party favors to lure impoverished researchers into springing for a package deal. They had the usual enhancements but the range was nothing special.
    They seemed to be sufficient for Slippers’s purposes, though. Second window from the left, a heat source moved left to right about a hundred meters out. The camera panned automatically, tracking the target while he amped the zoom. The image resolved in slow degrees.
    Another one of the monastery’s eyes flared and died, its overlaid range finder fading a moment later: 3.2 kilometers. 
    That’s almost nine meters per second. On foot…
    “What happens when they get here?” he asked. 
    Slippers seemed more interested in a distant heatprint caught on number three: a small vehicle, an ATB, same basic design as—
    Wait a minute—
    “That’s my bike,” Brüks murmured, frowning. “That’s—me…”
    Slippers spared him a glance and a head shake. “Assub.”
    “No, listen—” It was far from a perfect mug shot, and Telonics’s steadicam tracking algorithms were the envy of no one in the field. But whoever sat astride that bike had Brüks’s mustache, the square lines of his face, the same multipocketed field vest that had been years out of style even when he’d inherited the damn thing two decades before. “You’re being hacked,” Brüks insisted. “That’s some kind of recording, someone must’ve—” Someone was recording me? “I mean, look at it!”
    Two more cameras down. Seven so far. Slippers wasn’t even bothering to clear the real estate by closing the channels. Something else had caught his eye. He tapped the edge of a window that looked onto a naked-eye view of the desert sky. The stars strewn across that display glittered like sugar on velvet. Brüks wanted to fall into that sky, get lost in the stark peaceful beauty of a night without tactical overlays or polarized enhancements.
    But even here, the monk had found something to ruin the view: a brief flicker, a dim red nimbus framing an oval patch of starscape for the blink of an eye. The display clicked softly, an infinitesimal sharpening of focus—and in the next instant the stars returned, unsullied and pristine.
    Except for a great hole in the night hanging over the western ridge, a vast dark oval where no stars shone. 
    Something was crawling toward them across the sky, eating the stars as it went. It was as cold as the stratosphere—at least, it didn’t show up on any of the adjacent thermal views. And it was huge; it covered a good twenty degrees of arc even though it was still—
    No range finder. No heatprint. If not for whatever microlensing magic Slippers had just performed, not even this eclipse of ancient starlight would have given it away.
    I, Brüks realized, have definitely picked the wrong side.
    Twenty-three hundred meters. In five minutes the zombies would be knocking at the door.
    “Carousel,” Slippers murmured, and something in his voice made Brüks look twice.
    The monk was smiling. But he wasn’t looking at the cloaked behemoth marching across Orion’s Belt. His eyes were on a ground’s-eye view of the vortex engine. There was no audio feed; the tornado whirled silently in the StarlAmped window, a shackled green monster tearing up airspace. Brüks could hear it anyway—roaring in his memory, bending the ducts and the blades of the substructure that birthed it, vibrating through the very bedrock. He could feel it in the soles of his feet. And now Brother Slippers brought up a whole new window, a panel not of camera views or tactical overlays but of engineering readouts, laminar feed and humidity injection rates, measures of torque and velocity and compressible flow arrayed along five hundred meters of altitude. Offset to one side a luminous wire-frame disc labeled VEC/PRIME sprouted a thousand icons around its perimeter; a hundred more described spokes and spirals toward its heart. Heating elements. Countercurrent exchangers. The devil’s own mixing board. Slippers nodded, as if to himself: “Watch.”
    Icons and outputs began to move. There was nothing dramatic in the readouts, no sudden acceleration into red zones, no alarms. Just the slightest tweak of injection rates on one side of the circle; the gentlest nuzzle of convection and condensation on the other.
    Over in its window, the green monster raised one toe.
    Holy shit. They’re going to set it free… 
    A wash of readouts turned yellow; in the heart of that sudden sunny bloom, a dozen others turned orange. A couple turned red.
    With ponderous, implacable majesty, the tornado lifted from the earth and stepped out across the desert.
    
    <#>
    
    It came down on two of the zombies. Brüks saw it all through a window that tracked the funnel’s movements across the landscape: saw the targets break and weave far faster than merely human legs could carry a body. They zigzagged, a drunkard’s sprint by undead Olympians.
    They might as well have been rooted to the ground. The tornado sucked those insignificant smudges of body heat into the sky so fast they didn’t even leave an afterimage. It hesitated for a few seconds, rooted through the earth like some great elephant’s trunk. It devoured dirt and gravel and boulders the size of automobiles. Then it was off, carving its name into the desert.
    Back in its garage, swirls of moisture condensed anew where the monster had broken free.
    The vortex was past the undead perimeter now, veering northwest. It hopped once more, lifting its great earth-shattering foot into the air; pieces of pulverized desert rained down in its wake. A distant, disconnected subroutine in Brüks’ mind—some ganglion of logic immune to awe or fear or intimidation—wondered at the questionable efficiency of throwing an entire weather system at two lousy foot soldiers, at the infinitesimal odds of even hitting a target on such a wild trajectory. But it fell silent in the next second, and didn’t speak again.
    The whirlwind was not staggering randomly into that good night. It was bearing down on a distant figure riding an ATB.
    It was coming for him.
    This isn’t possible, Brüks thought. You can’t steer a tornado, nobody can. The most you can do is let it loose and get out of the way. This isn’t happening. This isn’t happening.
    I am not out there…
    But something was, and it knew it was being hunted. Brüks’s own hacked cameras told the tale: the ATB had abandoned its straight-line trajectory in favor of breakneck evasive maneuvers that would have instantly pitched any human rider over the handlebars. It slewed and skidded, kicked up plumes that sparkled sapphire in the amped starlight. The vortex weaved closer. They swept across the desert like partners in some wild and calamitous dance full of twirls and arabesques and impossible hairpin turns. They were never in step. Neither followed the other’s lead. And yet some invisible, unbreakable thread seemed to join the two, pulled them implacably into each other’s arms. Brüks watched, hypnotized at the sight of his own imminent ascension; the ATB was caught in orbit now around its monstrous nemesis. For a moment Brüks thought it might even break free—was it his imagination, or was the funnel thinner than it had been?—but in the next his doppelgänger lost its footing and skidded toward dissolution.
    In that instant it changed. 
    Brüks wasn’t certain how, exactly. It would have happened too fast even if whirling debris and the grain of boosted photons hadn’t obscured the view. But it was as though the image of Daniel Brüks and his faithful steed split somehow, as if something inside was trying to shed its skin and break free, leaving a lizard-tail husk behind for the sky-beast to chew on. The maelstrom moved in, a blizzard of rock and dust obscuring any detail. The funnel was visibly weakening now but it still had enough suction to take its quarry whole.
    Still had teeth enough to smash it to fragments.
    The undead broke ranks.
    It wasn’t a retreat. It didn’t even seem to be a coordinated exercise. The candles just stopped advancing and flickered back and forth in their windows, nine hundred meters out, directionless and Brownian. Far behind them the sated whirlwind weaved away to the north, a dissipating ropy thing, nearly exhausted.
    “Dymic.” Slippers nodded knowingly. “Assub.”
    Back on the pad a newborn vortex chafed at its restraints, smaller than its predecessor but angrier, somehow. Yellow icons blossomed across VEC/PRIME like rampant brushfires. Overhead, something was eating Gemini feetfirst.
    Another window opened on the wall, a hodgepodge of emerald alphanumerics. Slippers blinked and frowned, as though the apparition was somehow unexpected. Greek equations, Cyrillic footnotes, even a smattering of English flowed across the new display. 
    Not telemetry. Not incoming. According to the status bar, this was an outgoing transmission; the Bicamerals were signaling someone. It all flickered by too fast for Brüks to have made much sense of it even if he had spoken Russian, but occasional fragments of English stuck in his eye. Theseus was one. Icarus another. Something about angels and asteroids flashed center stage for a moment and evaporated.
    More glyphs, more numbers: three parallel columns this time, rendered in red. Someone talking back.
    Out in the desert, the zombies stopped flickering.
    “Huh,” Slippers said, and raised a finger to his right temple. For the first time Brüks noticed an old-fashioned earbud there, an audio antique from the days before cortical inlays and bone conduction. Slippers inclined his head, listening; up on the wall a flurry of red and green turned the ongoing exchange into a Christmas celebration.
    Over on VEC/PRIME, orange and red icons downshifted to yellow. The chained vortex stopped thrashing on its pad and whirled smoothly at attention. Halfway to the horizon, the last vestiges of its older sibling dissipated in a luminous mist of settling dust. 
    The desert rested quietly beneath an invisible thing in the sky.
    Just a few minutes ago, Dan Brüks had watched himself die out there. Or maybe escape in the nick of time. Something like him, anyway. Right up until that last moment when the maelstrom had chewed it up and spat it out. And right at that moment, the zombies had come—unglued…
    Assub, Slippers had said then. At least, that’s what Brüks had heard. Assub.
    Ass—hub?
    “A.S.?” he said aloud. Brother Slippers turned, raised an eyebrow.
    “A.S.,” Brüks repeated. “What’s it stand for?”
    “Artificial Stupidity. Grabs local surveillance archives to blend in. Chameleon response.”
    “But why me? Why”—in the sky, invisible airships—“why anything? Why not just cloak, like that thing up there?”
    “Can’t cloak thermal emissions without overheating,” Slippers told him. “Not for long at least, not if you’re an endotherm. Best you can do is make yourself look like something else. Dynamic mimicry.”
    Dymic.
    Brüks snorted, shook his head. “You’re not even Bicameral, are you?”
    Slippers smiled faintly. “You thought I was?”
    “It’s a monastery. You spoke like…”
    Slippers shook his head. “Just visiting.”
    Acronyms. “You’re military,” Brüks guessed.
    “Something like that.”
    “Dan Brüks,” he said, extending a hand.
    The other man looked at it for a moment. Reached out his own. “Jim Moore. Welcome to the armistice.”
    “What just happened?”
    “They came to terms. For the moment.”
    “They?”
    “The monks and the vampire.” 
    “I thought those were zombies.”
    “Those are.” Moore tapped the wall; a heat source appeared in the distance, a lone bright pinprick well behind the line. “That isn’t. Zombies don’t do anything without someone pulling their strings. She’s coming in now.”
    “Vampires,” Brüks said.
    “Vampire. Solitary op.” And then, almost as an afterthought, “Those things aren’t good in groups.”
    “I didn’t even know we let them out. I actually thought we were pretty scrupulous about keeping them, you know. Contained.”
    “So did I.” Pale flickering light washed the color from Moore’s face. “Not quite sure what her story is.”
    “What’s she have against the Bicamerals?”
    “I don’t know.”
    “Why did she stop?”
    “Enemy of my enemy.”
    Brüks let that sink in. “You’re saying there’s a bigger enemy out there. A, a common threat.”
    “Potentially.”
    Out in the desert, that dimensionless point of heat had grown large enough to move on visible legs. It did not appear to be running, yet somehow crossed the desert far faster than any baseline was likely to walk.
    “So I guess I can go now,” Brüks said. 
    The old soldier turned to face him. Regret mingled with the tactical reflections in his eyes.
    “Not a chance,” he said.
     <tepi>Either war is obsolete, or men are.
     <teps>—R. Buckminster Fuller
    
    Two guards stood at the door halfway down the hall, one to each side, like a couple of dark golems in matching pajamas. Brüks had not been invited to the party inside but he followed Moore at a distance, hanging back along the edge of the corridor for want of any other destination. Bicamerals brushed past in both directions, going about whatever business involved the domestication of weaponized whirlwinds. They seemed unremarkable in the morning light slanting through the windows. No arcane ululations. No vestments or hooded robes, no uniforms of any kind that Brüks could make out. A couple wore denim. One, preoccupied with a tacpad as he passed, was stark naked except for the tattoo squirming along his chest: some kind of winged animal Brüks was pretty sure didn’t exist anywhere in the taxonomic database.
    They still had stars in their eyes, though.
    Ahead, Moore stepped between the guards and into the room. Brüks sidled up in his wake. The sentries stood still as stone, barefoot, faces forward, their beige coveralls identically featureless. Empty holsters hung from their belts.
    Their lightless eyes wouldn’t stop moving. They jiggled and jerked in panicked little arcs, back and forth, up and down, as though terrified souls had been buried alive in wet cement. Someone coughed softly down the hall. All four eyes locked on that sound for the merest instant, froze in synchronized quadrascopic far focus: then broke, and resumed struggling in their sockets.
    There was a market niche for zombies, Brüks had read, among those who still took their sex in the first person. He tried to imagine fucking any creature possessed of such eyes, and shuddered.
    He passed by on the far side of the hall. Parallax served up a moving slice of the room behind the door: Jim Moore, a tabletop holo display in standby mode, a handful of Bicamerals nodding among themselves. A woman: lean as a greyhound beneath a mimetic body stocking, a bone-pale face under a spiky shock of short black hair, jawline just a bit more prognathous than any card-carrying prey might feel comfortable with. She turned her head as Brüks crept by. Her eyes flashed like a cat’s. She bared her teeth. On anyone else it would have been a smile. 
    The door swung shut.
    “Hey. Hungry?”
    He jumped at the hand on his arm but it was only a woman, dreadlocked and gracile and with a smile that warmed his skin instead of freezing it. Her skin was uniform chocolate, not the rainbow swirl of false-color it had been the night before; but he recognized the voice.
    “Lianna.” He grunted, taking her in. “You’re the first person I’ve seen here who’s actually dressed like a monk.”
    “It’s a bathrobe. We’re not really into gang colors around here.” She jerked her chin down the hall. “C’mon. Breakfast.”
    
    <#>
    
    They selected their meals from a commons that looked reassuringly like a conventional cafeteria bar (cloned bacon, Brüks was relieved to see; he’d been afraid the Bicamerals would be vegan traditionalists), but they ate sitting on the sprawling steps of the main entrance, watching the morning shadows shorten by degrees across the desert. The quiet hiss of an idling tornado drifted over the ramparts behind them.
    “That was quite the night,” Brüks said around a mouthful of egg. 
    “Quite the morning, too.” 
    He raised his eyes. Far overhead, the contrail of some passing airbus etched a line across the sky.
    “Oh, it’s still up there,” Lianna remarked. “Kinda flickers in and out of the higher wavelengths if you stare hard enough.”
    “I can’t see it.”
    “What kind of augments you got?”
    “For my eyes? Nothing.” Brüks dropped his gaze back to the horizon. “Got wired with cryptochrome back when it was the Next Big Thing, thought it would help me find my way around down in Costa Rica. You know the ads, never be lost again. Except suddenly I wasn’t just seeing Earth’s magnetic field, I was seeing a halo around every bloody tacpad and charge mat. It was distracting as hell.”
    Lianna nodded. “Well, it takes some getting used to. Give sight to the blind, takes time  to learn how to see.”
    “More than I had the patience for. Pigment’s still sitting back there in my retina but I got it blocked after about a week.”
    “Wow. You’re old school.”
    He fought back a twitch of irritation: Half my age, and she’s probably already forgotten the difference between the meat she was born with and the chrome that came after. “I’ve got the usual brain boosts. Can’t very well get tenure otherwise.” Which reminds me—“I don’t suppose there’s any Cognital on the premises? I left mine back at camp.”
    Lianna’s eyes widened. “You take pills?”
    “It’s the same—”
    “It’d take about ten minutes to fit you with a pump and you take pills.” Her face split into a big goofy grin. “That’s not old school, that’s downright Paleolithic.”
    “Glad you find it so fucking amusing, Lianna. You have the pills or not?”
    “Not.” She pursed her lips. “I guess we could synthesize some. I’ll ask. Or you might ask Jim. He’s, well…”
    “Old school,” Brüks finished.
    “Actually, you’d be surprised how much wiring he’s got in his head.”
    “I’m surprised to even find him here. Military man in a monastery?”
    “Yeah, well, you were expecting us all to wear bathrobes.”
    “He’s here to help you in your war against the vamps?” Brüks set his empty plate beside him on the step. 
    She shook her head. “He’s here to—he just needed a place to work through some stuff. Also I think he’s kinda spying on us.” She cocked her head at him: “What about you?”
    “I got herded,” he reminded her.
    “No, I mean, what were you even doing out in the field? There any species even left out there that haven’t been RAMrodded and digitized?”
    “The extinct ones,” Brüks said shortly. Then, relenting: “Sure, you can virtualize anything in the lab. Still doesn’t tell you what it’s doing out in the wide wet world with a million unpredictable variables working on it.” 
    She looked out across the flats. Brüks followed her gaze. There, just off to the northwest: the ridge upon which his own home had crouched lo these past two months. He could not see it from here.
    “You gonna tell me what’s going on?” he said at last.
    “You got caught in the crossfire.”
    “What crossfire? Why were the zombies—”
    “The vampire,” Lianna said. “Valerie, actually.”
    “You’re kidding.”
    She shrugged.
    “So Valerie the Vampire summons her zombie forces against the Bicamerals. And now they’re all sitting together just down the hall, munching chips and cocktail wienies because—Moore said something about a common enemy.”
    “It’s complicated.”
    “Try me.”
    “You wouldn’t understand.” She tried for a smile—“You’re behind on your Cognital”— but it fell flat.
    “Look, I’m sorry I crashed your party but—” 
    “Dan, the truth is I don’t really know a whole lot more than you do at this point.” She spread her hands. “All I can tell you for sure is, well, you gotta trust them. They know what they’re doing.”
    She stopped just short of patting him on the head.
    He stood. “Glad to hear it. Then I guess I’ll leave you to your games, and thanks for the meal.”
    She looked up at him. “You know that can’t happen. Jim already told you that much.”
    “Are you going to tell me where my bike is, or do I have to walk?”
    “You can’t leave, Dan.”
    “You can’t keep me prisoner.”
    “It’s not us you have to worry about.”
    “Who’s us, this time? Bicamerals, vampires? Koalas?” 
    She pointed north across the desert, squinting. “Look out there. On that ridge.”
    He did. He saw nothing at first. Then, briefly, something glinted in the morning sun: a spark on the escarpment.
    “Now look up,” she said. A distant shard of brightness stabbed his eye from high to the east, a reflection of sunlight off empty sky.
    “Not us,” Lianna repeated. “You.”
    “Me—?”
    “People like you. Baselines.”
    He let it sink in.
    “Valerie must have hacked a fair number of sats just getting her pieces into position. As far as anything in orbit could tell, this whole chunk of desert just dropped out of existence for a good four hours last night. That got people’s attention. Someone probably slipped a drone or two under the ceiling in time to see our engine going through its paces—and those dance steps are, shall we say, a bit beyond what passes for state-of-the-art out there.” Lianna sighed. “The Bicamerals have been spooking the wrong people for years now. Too many breakthroughs, too fast, the usual. They’ve been watching, all this time they’ve been watching. And now, as far as they can tell, we’re in some kind of gang war with a bunch of zombies. 
    “They are not going to let this pass, Dan. Now that they’ve caught a glimpse behind the curtain they’ll have thrown a net over the whole reserve.”
    And I, Brüks reflected, don’t blame them one goddamned bit. “I’m not part of this. You said it yourself.”
    “You’re a witness. They’ll debrief you.”
    “So they’ll debrief me.” Brüks shrugged. “You haven’t told me anything. I haven’t seen anything they haven’t, if they deployed drones.”
    “You’ve seen more than you realize. Everyone does. And they will know that, so your debriefing with be aggressive.”
    “So that makes you, what? My personal guard? Here to feed me, and walk me, and make sure I don’t wander off into any of the rooms where the grown-ups are talking. And yank on my leash if I try to leave. That about sum it up?”
    “Dan—”
    “Look, you’re giving me a choice between a vampire with her zombie army and you baselines, as you so delicately put it.”
    She got to her feet. “I’m not giving you a choice.”
    “I have to leave sometime. I can’t spend the rest of my life here.”
    “If you try to leave now,” she said, “that’s exactly what you’ll have done.”
    He looked down at her: thin as a pussy willow, she only came up to his chest. 
    “You going to stop me?”
    She looked back without blinking. “I’m gonna try. If I have to. But I really hope it doesn’t come to that.”
    He stood there for the longest time. Then he picked up his plate.
    “Fuck you,” he said, and went back inside.
    
    <#>
    
    Within his prison, she gave him all the space in the world. She backed right off as he stalked down the hall, past the murmuring of the devout and the hyperkinetic gaze of the frozen zombies, past the closed-door deliberations of enemies-of-enemies and the open doors of dorms and studies and bathrooms. He moved without direction at first, following any corridor that presented itself, backtracking from every cul-de-sac, his feet exploring autonomously while his gut churned. After a while, some dull sullen pain behind his eyes brought him back to the here-and-now; he took more conscious note of his surroundings and decided to revisit Moore’s basement watchtower, as much for its relative familiarity as for any tactical insights he might glean. 
    He couldn’t find it. He remembered Lianna leading him through a hole in the wall; he remembered emerging from it after the armistice. It had to be off the main corridor, had to lie behind one of these identical oaken doors that lined the hall, but no perspective along that length seemed familiar. It was as though he was in some off-kilter mock-up of the place he’d been just an hour before, as though the layout of the monastery had changed subtly when he wasn’t looking. He started trying doors at random.
    The third was ajar. Low voices murmured behind it. It swung inward easily; flat panels of vat-cloned hardwood lined the space beyond, a kind of library or map room that looked out onto a grassy compound (half sunlit, half in shadow) past the opposite end of the room. Past sliding glass doorways, arcane objects rose haphazardly from that immaculate lawn. Brüks couldn’t tell whether they were machines or sculptures or some half-assed hybrid of the two. The only thing that looked at all familiar out there was a shallow washbasin set atop a boxy waist-high pedestal. 
    There was another one of those inside, too, just past a conference table that dominated the center of the room itself. Two mismatched Bicamerals stood at the table’s edge, gazing at a collection of dice-size objects scattered across some kind of hard-copy map or antique game board. The Japanese monk was gaunt as a scarecrow; the Caucasian could have passed for Santa Claus at the departmental Christmas party, given the right threads and a pillow stuffed down his front.
    “From Queensland, maybe,” Santa remarked. “That place always bred the best neurotoxins.”
    The scarecrow scooped up a handful of objects (not dice, Brüks saw now; a collection of multifaceted lumps that made him think of mahogany macramé) and arranged them in a rough crescent across the board.
    Santa considered. “Still not enough. Even if we could sift the Van Allens dry on short notice.” He absently scratched the side of his neck, seemed to notice Brüks at last. “You’re the refugee.”
    “Biologist.”
    “Welcome anyway.” Santa smacked his lips. “I’m Luckett.” 
    “Dan Brüks.” He took the other man’s nod for an invitation and stepped closer to the table. The pattern decorating the game board—a multicolored spiral of interlocking Penrose tiles—was far more complex than any he remembered from his grandfather’s attic. It seemed to move at the corner of his eye, to crawl just so when he wasn’t quite looking.
    The scarecrow clicked his tongue, eyes never leaving the table.
    “Don’t mind Masaso,” Luckett remarked. “He’s not much for what you’d call normal conversation.”
    “Does everyone around here speak in tongues?”
    “Speak—oh, I see what you mean.” Luckett laughed softly. “No, with Masaso here it’s more like a kind of aphasia. When he’s not linked in, anyway.”
    The scarecrow spilled a few more mahogany knuckles with chaotic precision. Luckett laughed again, shook his head.
    “He talks through board games,” Brüks surmised.
    “Close enough. Who knows? I might be doing the same thing by the time I graduate.”
    “You’re not—?” Of course he wasn’t. His eyes didn’t sparkle.
    “Not yet. Acolyte.”
    It was enough that he spoke English. “I’m trying to find the room I was in last night. Basement, spiral stairs, kind of a war room bunker feel to it?”
    “Ah. The Colonel’s lair. North hall, first right, second door on the left.” 
    “Okay. Thanks.”
    “Not at all.” Luckett turned away as Masaso clicked and rolled the bones. “More than enough antimatter to break orbit, anyway. Least it saves on chemical mass.”
    Brüks stopped, hand on the doorknob. “What was that?”
    Luckett glanced back at him. “Just drawing up plans. Nothing to worry about.”
    “You guys have antimatter?”
    “Before long.” Luckett grinned and dipped his hands into the washbasin. “God willing.”
    
    <#>
    
    Most of the tactical collage was dark, or writhing with analog static. A half dozen windows flickered fitfully through random points of view: desert, desert, desert. No satcam imagery. Either Moore had shut down those feeds or whoever was behind the blockade had walled off the sky as well as the horizon.
    Brüks tapped experimentally on an unlit patch of paint. His touch provoked a brief flicker of red, but nothing else. 
    The active windows kept changing, though. Some kind of motion sensor built into the feed, maybe: views would pan and pounce, flash-zooming on this flickering shadow or that distant escarpment. Sometimes Brüks couldn’t see anything noteworthy at the center of attention: a falcon grooming itself on a skeletal branch, or the burrow of a desert rodent halfway to the horizon. Once or twice a little fall of rock skittering down a distant slope, scree dislodged by some unseen disturbance.
    Once, partially eclipsed by leaves and scrub, a pair of glassy reflections looking back.
    “Help you?” 
    Jim Moore reached past Brüks's shoulder and tapped the display. A new window sprang to life at his fingertip. Brüks stepped aside while the soldier stretched the window across the paint, called up a feed, zoomed on a crevice splitting a hillock to the south.
    “I was trying to get online,” Brüks admitted. “See if anyone out there’s picked up on this whole—quarantine thing.”
    “Net’s strictly local. I don’t think the Bicamerals actually have Quinternet access.”
    “What, they’re afraid of getting hacked?” It was an ongoing trend, Brüks had heard: defensive self-partitioning in the face of Present Shock, and damn the legal consequences. People were starting to weigh costs against benefits, opt for a day or two outside the panopticon even in the face of the inevitable fines and detentions. 
    But Moore was shaking his head. “I don’t think they need it. Do you feel especially lost without access to the telegraph network?”
    “What’s a telegraph?”
    “Exactly.” Something caught the Colonel’s eye. “Huh. That’s not good.”
    Brüks followed the other man’s gaze to the window he’d opened, to the crevice centered there. “I don’t see anything.”
    Moore played a little arpeggio on the wall. The image blossomed into false color. Something glowed Euclidean yellow in all that fractal blue.
    He grunted. “Aerosol delivery, looks like.”
    “Your guys?”
    The corner of Moore’s mouth curled the slightest bit. “Can’t really say.”
    “What’s to say? You’re a soldier, right? They’re soldiers, unless the government’s started subcontracting to—”
    “Biothermals, too. They’re not trusting their bots to run things.” There was a hint of amusement in the old soldier’s voice. “Probably baselines, then.”
    “Why’s that?”
    “Fragile egos. Low self-esteem.” His fingers skipped across the darkened wall. Bright windows flared everywhere they touched.
    “At least you’re all on the same side then, right?”
    “Doesn’t really work like that.”
    “What’s that supposed to mean?”
    “The chain of command isn’t what it used to be.” Moore smiled faintly. “It’s more—organic, these days. Anyway.” Another finger dance; the window dwindled and slid to an empty spot along the edge of the wall. “They’re still setting up. We’ve got time.”
    “How was the meeting?” Brüks asked
    “Still going on. Not much point hanging around after the opening ceremonies, though. I’d just slow them down.”
    “And let me guess: you can’t tell me what’s going on, and it’s none of my business anyway.”
    “Why would you say that?”
    “Lianna said—”
    “Dr. Lutterodt wasn’t at the meeting,” Moore reminded him.
    “Okay. So is there anything you can—”
    “The Fireflies,” Moore said.
    Brüks blinked. “What about—oh. Your common enemy.”
    Moore nodded.
    Memories of intercepted negotiations, scrolling past in Christmas colors: “Theseus. They found something out there?”
    “Maybe. Nothing’s certain yet, just—hints and inferences. No solid intel.”
    “Still.” An alien agency capable of simultaneously dropping sixty thousand surveillance probes into the atmosphere without warning. An agency that came and went in seconds, that caught the planet with its pants down and took God knew how many compromising pictures along God knew how many wavelengths before letting the atmosphere burn its own paparazzi down to a sprinkle of untraceable iron floating through the stratosphere. An agency never seen before and never since, for all the effort put into finding it. “I guess that qualifies as a common threat,” Brüks admitted.
    “I guess it does.” Moore turned back to his war wall.
    “Why were they fighting in the first place? What does a vampire have against a bunch of monks?”
    Moore didn’t answer for a moment. Then: “It’s not personal, if that’s what you’re thinking.”
    “What, then?”
    Moore took a breath. “It’s—more of the same, really. Entropy, increasing. The Realists and their war on Heaven. The Nanohistomites over in Hokkaido. Islamabad on fire.”
    Brüks blinked. “Islamabad’s—”
    “Oops. Getting ahead of myself. Give it time.” The Colonel shrugged. “I’m not trying to be coy, Dr. Brüks. You’re already in the soup, so I’ll tell you what I can so long as it doesn’t endanger you further. But you’re going to have to take a lot on—well, on faith.”
    Brüks stifled a laugh. Moore looked at him.
    “Sorry,” Brüks said. “It’s just, you hear so much about the Bicamerals and their scientific breakthroughs and their quest for Truth. And I finally get inside this grand edifice and all I hear is Trust and God willing and Take it on faith. I mean, the whole order’s supposed to be founded on the search for knowledge, and Rule Number One is Don’t ask questions?” 
    “It’s not that they don’t have answers,” Moore said after a moment. “It’s just that we can’t understand them for the most part. You could resort to analogies, I suppose. Force transhuman insights into human cookie-cutter shapes. But most of the time that would just get you a bleeding metaphor with all its bones broken.” He held up a hand, warding off Brüks's  rejoinder. “I know, I know: it can be frustrating as hell. But people have an unfortunate habit of assuming they understand the reality just because they understood the analogy. You dumb down brain surgery enough for a preschooler to think he understands it, the little tyke’s liable to grab a microwave scalpel and start cutting when no one’s looking.”
    “And yet.” Brüks glanced at the wall, where AEROSOL DELIVERY glowed in shades of yellow and orange. Where a murderous tornado had rampaged the night before. “They seem to solve their conflicts pretty much the same way as us retarded ol’ baselines.”
    Moore smiled faintly. “That they do.”
     
    <#>
    
    He found Lianna back on the front steps, supper balanced on her knees, watching the sun go down. She looked back over her shoulder as he pushed through the door.
    “I asked about your brain-boosters,” she said. “No luck. The assembly line’s booked or something.”
    “Thanks for trying,” he said.
    “Jim might still be holding. If you haven’t asked him already.” 
    He shifted his tray to one hand, used the other to rub away the vague pain behind his eyes. “Mind if I join you?”
    She spared one hand to take in the staircase, as broad and excessive as a cathedral’s.
    He sat beside her, picked at his own plate. “About this morning, I, uh…”
    She stared at the horizon. The sun stared back, highlighting her cheekbones.
    “…sorry,” he finished.
    “Forget it. Nobody likes being in a cage.”
    “Still. I shouldn’t have shot the messenger.” A sudden chilly breeze crawled across his shoulders.
    Lianna shrugged. “You ask me, nobody should shoot anybody.”
    He raised his eyes. Venus twinkled back at them. He wondered briefly if those photons had followed a straight line to his eyes, or if they’d been shunted around some invisible spillway of curves and angles at the last nanosecond. He looked around at the cracked desert floor, lifted his gaze to the more jagged topography in the distance. Wondered how many unseen agents were looking back.
    “You always eat out here?”
    “When I can.” The lowering sun stretched her shadow along the ramparts behind them, a giantess silhouetted in orange. “It’s—stark, you know?”
    Ribbed clouds, a million shades of salmon, scudding against an orange and purple sky.
    “How long does this go on?” he wondered.
    “This?”
    “They lurk out there, we wait in here. When does somebody actually make a move?”
    “Oldschool, you gotta relax.” She shook her head, smiled a twilit smile. “You could obsess and second-guess for a solid month and I guarantee you wouldn’t be able to think of anything our hosts haven’t already factored five ways to Sunday. They’ve been making moves all day.”
    “Such as?”
    “Don’t ask me.” She shrugged. “I probably wouldn’t understand even if they told me. They’re wired up way differently.”
    Hive mind, he reminded himself.  Synesthetes, too, if he wasn’t mistaken.
     “You do understand them, though,” he said.  “That’s your job.”
    “Not the way you think. And not without a fair bit of modding on my own.” 
    “How, then?”
    “I’m not sure,” she admitted.
    “Come on.”
    “No, really. It’s a kind of Zen thing. Like playing the piano, or being a centipede in Heaven. The moment you start to think about what you’re doing, you screw up. You just have to get into the zone.”
    “They must have trained you at some point,” Brüks insisted. “There must have been some kind of conscious learning curve.”
    “You’d think so, wouldn’t you?” She squinted up at some invisible behemoth he still couldn’t see. “But they kind of—bypassed that. Zapped my fornix with just the right burst of ultrasound and next thing I know it’s four days later and I have all these reflexes. Not so much that I understand them as my fingers do, you know? Phonemes, rhythms, gestures—eye movements, sometimes—” She frowned. “I take in all these cues and equations just—come to me, piece by piece. I copy them down and I send ’em off.  And the next day they show up in the latest issue of Science.”
    “You never examined these reflexes afterward? Played the piano really slowly, taken the time to watch what your fingers were doing?”
    “Dan, they won’t fit. Consciousness is a scratchpad. You can store a grocery list, jot down a couple of phone numbers—but were you even aware of finishing your supper?”
    Brüks looked down at his plate. It was empty.
    “And that’s just a couple of swallows half a minute in the past. You ever try holding, say, even a single chapter of a novel in your head? Consciously? All at once?” Her dreads swept back and forth in the gloom. “Whatever I’m doing, it’s got too many variables. Won’t fit in the global workspace.” She flashed him a small, apologetic smile.
    They program us like clockwork dolls, he thought.  Way off to the west, the sun touched gently down on a distant ridge.
    He looked at her. “Why are we still in charge?”
    She grinned. “Who’s we, white boy?”
    He didn’t. “These people you—work for. They’re supposed to be helpless, that’s what everyone says. You can optimize a brain for down there or up here, not both. Anyone comfortable thinking at Planck scales, they can barely cross the street unassisted up in the real world. That’s why they set up in the desert. That’s why they have people like you. That’s what they tell us.”
    “All true, more or less,” Lianna said.
    He shook his head. “They micromanage tornadoes, Lee. They turn people into puppets with a wink and a wave, they own half the patent office. They’re about as helpless as a T. rex in a daycare center. So why haven’t they been running things for years?”
    “That’s like a chimp asking why those hairless apes aren’t slinging bigger feces than everyone else, if they’re so damned clever.”
    He tried not to smile, and failed. “That’s not really an answer.”
    “Sure it is. Everybody goes on about hive mind this and synesthesia that like they were some kind of superpowers.”
     “After last night, you’re going to tell me they’re not?”
    “It goes so much deeper than that. It’s perceptual. We’re so—impoverished, you know? We don’t look out at reality at all, we look in at this model, this caricature our brains cobble together out of wavelengths and pressure points. We squint down over handwritten notes that say two blocks east, turn left at the bridge and we think that reading those stupid scribbles is the same as seeing the universe passing by on the other side of the windshield.” She glanced over her shoulder, to the edifice at their backs.
    Brüks frowned. “You think Bicamerals can see outside the windshield.”
    “Dunno. Maybe.”
    “Then I’ve got some bad news for you. Reality went out the window the moment we started mediating sensory input through a nervous system. You want to actually perceive the universe directly, without any stupid scribbles or model-building? Become a protozoan.”
    A smile lit her face, startlingly bright in the deepening gloom. “Wouldn’t that be just like them. Build a group mind complex enough to put any hundred baseline geniuses to shame, and use it to think like a paramecium.”
    “That wasn’t exactly my point,” he said.
    The sun winked good-bye and slid below the horizon.
    “I don’t know how they do it,” she admitted. “But if what they see is even closer to reality—well, that’s what you call transcendence. Not the ability to micromanage tornados, just —seeing a little more of what’s out there.” She tapped her temple. “Instead of what’s in here.” 
    She stood, stretched like a cat. Brüks rose beside her and brushed the desert from his clothes. “Then transcendence is out of reach. For our brains, anyway.”
    Lianna shrugged. “Change your brain.”
    “Then it’s not your brain anymore. It’s something else. You’re something else.”
    “That’s kinda the point. Transcendence is transformation.”
    He shook his head, unconvinced. “Sounds more like suicide to me.”

    <#>
    
    He felt his eyes start up under closed lids, stepped out onto that razor-thin line between dreamtime and the waking edge: just enough awareness to see the curtain, not enough to notice the man behind.
    Lucid dreaming was a delicate exercise.
    He sat up on the pallet, phantom legs still wearing corporeal ones like the abdomen of some half-molted insect. He looked around at furnishings that would have been spartan to anyone who hadn’t just spent two months sleeping on the desert floor: a raised sleeping pallet a couple of meters long, dipped in some softer, thicker variant of the fleshy synthetic lining the floors. An alcove in the wall, a medicine cabinet fronted with frosted glass. Another one of those washbasin pedestals, this one with a towel bar bolted to the side facing the bed: a hand towel draped over it. The cubby Luckett had tucked him into for the night, all pretty much the way it looked when he was awake. 
    He’d learned to launch his dreams from a platform anchored in reality. It made the return trip easier.
    Brüks flexed his temporoparietal and ascended through a ceiling of polished granite (that was surmise—he’d forgotten to take note of its composition in the waking world). The monastery spread out around, then below him: dwindled from a life-size fortress to a tabletop model on a cracked gray moonscape. A fingernail moon shone bone-white overhead; everywhere else, a million stars glinted hard as ice crystals against the darkness.
    He flew north.
    It was minimalist magic: no rainbow bridges or talking clouds, no squadrons of aircraft piloted by tyrannosaurs. He’d long since learned not to strain the credulity of whatever mental processes indulged his presence here, critics that had lived in his head since before his dreams had even been lucid. Some inner skeptic frowned at the thought of a space-faring bicycle and dreaming eight-year-old Danny Brüks found himself stranded between the stars. Some forebrain killjoy snorted at the giddy delight of flying and suddenly he was entangled in high-tension wires, or simply ejected back into consciousness at three in the morning, spat out of sleep by his own incredulity. Even in dreams, his brain had been selling him out since before he’d had hair on his crotch. As an adult he’d had no use for them until his limited baseline learning curve had run out of waking hours, forced him to learn new techniques in his sleep lest academia’s new-and-improving generation devoured him from behind.
    He could fly now at least, without thought or self-subversion. He’d learned that much through years of practice, through the induction hardware that had once guided his visions when REM started up, through the exercises that eventually let him ditch those training wheels and do it all in his own head. He could fly, into orbit and beyond and back if he wanted to. He could fly all the way to Heaven. That was where he was going now: the Northern Lights swirled in the sky directly ahead, a blue-green curtain shimmering above his destination like a Star of Bethlehem for the Holographic Age.
    But no talking clouds. He’d also learned not to push it.
    Now, ghostlike, he passed through Heaven’s fortifications and descended into its deepest levels. Rho languished there as she always did, alone in her cell, still wearing the paper smock and slippers she’d worn in Departures when they’d told each other it wasn’t goodbye. A cuff around her left ankle and a dozen links of corroded chain shackled her to the wall. Hair hung across her downcast face like a dark curtain.
    Her face lit up, though, as he descended through the ceiling.
    He settled beside her on the stone floor. “I’m sorry. I would’ve come sooner, I just—”
    He stopped. No point in wasting precious REM with dreamed apologies. He tweaked the script, started again.
    “You wouldn’t believe what’s happening,” he said.
    “Tell me.”
    “I’ve got caught up in some kind of war, I’m trapped behind enemy lines with a bunch of—really. You wouldn’t believe me.”
    “Monks and zombies,” she said. “And a vampire.”
    Of course she knew.
    “I don’t even know how I can be here. You’d think with all this stuff happening I’d be too wired to even sit down, but—”
    “You’ve been going straight for twenty-four hours.” She laid her hand on his. “Of course you’re going to crash.”
    “These people don’t,” he grumbled. “I don’t think they even sleep, not all at once anyway. Different parts of their brains take—shifts, or something. Like a bunch of dolphins.”
    “You’re not a dolphin, and you’re not some augmented wannabe either. You’re natural. Just the way I like it. And you know what?”
    “What?”
    “You’re going to keep up with them. You always do.”
    Not always, he thought.
    “You should come back,” he said suddenly. Somewhere far away, his fingers and toes tingled faintly.
    She shook her head. “We’ve been over this.”
    “Nobody’s saying you have to go back to the job. There are a million other options.”
    “In here,” she told him, “there are a billion.”
    He looked at her chain. He had never consciously forged those links. He’d simply found her like this. He could have changed her circumstance with a thought, of course, as he could change anything in this world—but there were always risks.
    He’d learned not to push it.
    “You can’t like it here,” he said quietly. 
    She laughed. “Why not? I didn’t put that thing on.”
    “But—” His temples throbbed. He willed them to stop.
    “Dan,” she said gently, “You can keep up out there. I can’t.”
    The tingling intensified in his extremities. Rho’s face wavered before him, fading to black. He couldn’t keep her together much longer. All this careful conservatism, these shackled environments that barely edged beyond the laws of physics—they only guarded against the Inner Heckler, not these unwelcome sensations intruding from outside. Headaches. Pins and needles. They distracted from his own contrivance; suddenly the whole façade was falling apart around him. “Come back soon,” his wife called through the rising static. “I’ll be waiting...” 
    She was gone before he could answer. He tried to construct something spectacular—the implosion of Heaven itself, a fiery inward collapse toward some ravenous singularity deep below the Canadian Shield—but he was rising too fast toward the light. 
    There’d been a time when he’d derided his own lack of imagination, cursed his inability to slip his shackles and just dream like everyone else, with glorious hallucinogenic abandon. Even now, sometimes, he had to remind himself: it wasn’t a failing at all. It was a strength.
    Even in sleep, Dan Brüks didn’t take anything on faith.
    
    
     
     <tepi>To himself everyone is immortal; he may know that he is going to die,
     but he can never know that he is dead. 
     <teps>—Samuel Butler
    
     Sunshine stabbed his eyes through the cell’s slotted window. His mouth was dry, his head athrob. His fingers pulsed with dull electricity. Slept on my hands, he thought, and tried to imagine how he might have actually done that as he swung his legs over the edge of the bed.
    The same pins and needles flooded the soles of his feet when he planted them on the floor.
    Great.
    He found his way to the lav that Luckett had shown him the night before, emptied his bladder while every extremity tingled and burned. The discomfort was beginning to fade by the time he flushed; he headed off down the empty hall in search of other warm bodies, only slightly unsteady on his feet.
    Something thumped behind one of the closed doors. He paused for a moment before continuing, his attention drawn by another door opening farther down the hall.
    By the naked blotchy thing that fell into view, choking and twitching as if electrocuted.
    He stood there for a moment, shocked into paralysis. Then he was moving again, his own trivial discomfort forgotten in a greater shock of recognition: Masaso the scarecrow, back arched, teeth bared, flesh stretched so tight across cheekbones that it was a wonder his face hadn’t split down the middle. Brüks was almost at the man’s side before realization stopped him in his tracks. 
    Every muscle thrown into tetany. This was some kind of motor disorder. 
    This was neurological.
    The pins and needles were back in full force. Brüks looked down in disbelief at his own fingertips. Try as he might, he couldn’t stop them from trembling.
    When the screaming started, he barely heard it.
    
    <#>
    
    Whatever it was, it killed quietly. For the most part.
    Not because it was painless. Its victims staggered from hiding and thrashed on the floors, faces twisted into agonized devil masks. Even the dead kept them on: veins bulging, eyes splattered crimson with pinpoint embolisms, each face frozen in the same calcified rictus. Not a word, not a groan from any of them. There was nothing he could do but step over the bodies as he tracked that lone voice screaming somewhere ahead; nothing he could feel but that terrifying electricity growing in his fingers and toes; nothing he could think but It’s in me too it’s in me too it’s in me too—
    Creatures in formation rounded the corner ahead of him: four human bodies moving in perfect step, more live than the bodies on the floor, just as dead inside. Valerie kept pace in their midst. Four sets of jiggling eyes locked on to Brüks for an instant, then resumed their frantic omnidirectional dance. Valerie didn’t even look in his direction. She moved as if spring-loaded, as if her joints were subtly out of place. One of her zombies was missing below the knees; the carbon prosthetics it used for legs squeaked softly against the floor as they approached. Apart from that subtle friction, Brüks couldn’t hear so much as a footfall from any of them. He flattened instinctively against the wall, praying to some Pleistocene god for invisibility—or at least, for insignificance. Valerie swept abreast of him, eyes straight ahead. 
    Brüks squeezed his eyes shut. Soft screams filled the darkness. He felt a small distant pride that none of them came from him. When he opened his eyes again the monster was gone.
     The screaming had grown fainter. More—intimate. Some horrific lighthouse beacon running low on batteries, calling through the fog of war. Except this was no fucking war: this was a massacre, this was one tribe of giants slaughtering another, and any baseline fossil stupid enough to get caught underfoot didn’t even rate the brutal mercy of a slashed throat on the battlefield.
    Welcome to the armistice.
    He followed the sound. He doubted there was anything he could do—euthanasia, perhaps—but if it could scream, maybe it could talk. Maybe it could tell him—something…
    It already had, in a way. It had told him that all victims were not equal in the eyes of this pestilence. All the Bicamerals he’d seen so far seemed to have fallen within minutes of each other, seized by the throat and turned to tortured stone before they’d even had a chance to cry out. Not everyone, though. Not the vampire and her minions. Not the screamer. Not Dan Brüks. 
    Not yet.
    But he was infected, oh yes he was. Something was at work on his distal circuitry, shorting out his fine motor control, working its way up the main cables. Maybe the screamer was just a little farther along. Maybe the screamer was Daniel Brüks in another ten minutes.
    Maybe it was right here, behind this door.
    Brüks pushed it open.
    Luckett. He squirmed like a hooked eelpout in a cell identical to the one where Brüks had slept, slid around on a floor slippery with his own fluids. Sweat turned his tunic into a soaked dishrag, ran in torrents from his face and limbs; darker stains spread from his crotch. 
    The hook hadn’t caught him by the mouth, though. It sprouted from a port at the back of his neck, a shivering fiber running to a socket low on the wall. Luckett convulsed. His head struck the edge of an overturned chair. The blow seemed to bring him back a little; the screaming stopped, the eyes cleared, something approaching awareness filtered through the dull animal pain that filled them.
    “Brüks,” he moaned, “Brüks, get it—fuck it hurts…”
    Brüks knelt, laid a hand on the other man’s shoulder. “I—”
    The acolyte thrashed away from the touch, screaming all over again: “Fucking hell that hurts—!” He flailed one arm: a deliberate gesture, Brüks guessed, an instruction trying to dig its way out past the roaring static of a million short-circuiting motor nerves. Brüks followed its path to a small glass-fronted cabinet set into the wall. Lozenges of doped ceramic rested in neat labeled rows behind the sliding pane: HAPPINESS, ORGASM, APPETITE SUPPRESSANT—
    ANALGESIC.
    He grabbed it off the shelf, dropped to Luckett’s side, grabbed the fiberop at the cervical end: fumbled, as fingers misheard brain. Luckett screamed again, arched his back like a drawn bow. The smell of shit filled the room. Brüks gripped the plug, twisted. The socket clicked free. Seething light flooded the walls: camera feeds, spline plots, deserts painted in garish blizzards of false color. Some tame oracle, deprived of direct access to Luckett’s brain, continuing its conversation in meatspace.
    Brüks jammed the painkiller home, click-twisted it into place. Luckett sagged instantly; his fingers continued to twitch and shiver, purely galvanic. For a moment Brüks thought the acolyte had lost consciousness. Then Luckett took a great heaving gulp of air, let it out again.
    “That’s better,” he said.
    Brüks eyed Luckett’s trembling fingers, eyed his own. “It’s not. This is—”
    “Not my department,” Luckett coughed. “Not yours either, thank your lucky stars.”
    “But what is it? There’s got to be a fix.” He remembered: a rosette of monsters, the vampire at its heart, moving with frictionless efficiency through the dying fields. “Valerie—”
    Luckett shook his head. “She’s on our side.”
    “But she’s—”
    “Not her.” Luckett turned his head, rested his eyes an overhead real-time tactical of the surrounding desert: the monastery at the bull’s-eye, a perimeter of arcane hieroglyphics around the edges. “Them.”
    We’ve been making moves all day.
    “What did you do? What did you do?”
    “Do?” Luckett coughed, wiped blood from his mouth with the back of his hand. “You were here, my friend. We got noticed. And now we’re—reaping the whirlwind, you might say.” 
    “They wouldn’t just—” Then again, why wouldn’t they? “Wasn’t there some kind of, of ultimatum? Didn’t they give us a chance to surrender, or—”
    The look Luckett gave him was an even mix of pity and amusement.
    Brüks cursed himself for an idiot. Headaches for most of the day before. Moore’s aerosol delivery. But there’d been no artillery, no lethal canisters lobbed whistling across the desert. This thing had drifted in on the breeze, undetected. And not even engineered germs killed on contact. There was always an incubation period, it always took time for a few lucky spores to hatch out in the lungs and breed an army big enough to take down a human body. Even the magic of exponential growth took hours to manifest.
    The enemy—
    —People like you, Lianna had said—
    —must have set this plan in motion the moment they’d set up their perimeter. It wouldn’t have mattered one good goddamn if the whole Bicameral Order had marched out across the desert with their hands in the air; the weapon was already in their blood, and it was blind to white flags.
    “How could you let them do this?” Brüks hissed. “You’re supposed to be smarter than us, you’re post-fucking-singular, you’re supposed to be ten steps ahead of any plan we poor stupid cavemen could ever put together. How could you let them?”
     “Oh, but this is all according to plan.” Luckett patted him on the arm with one spastic, short-circuiting hand. 
    “What plan?” Brüks choked back a hysterical giggle. “We’re dead already—”
    “Even God can’t plan for everything. Too many variables.” Luckett coughed again. “Not to worry, though. We planned for the things we couldn’t plan for…” 
    Faintly, through the open door—drifting down the corridor, through high narrow windows; through barred gates, though glass panes looking into deserts and gardens: a whistling sound, Doppler-shifted. The muffled thud of some nearby impact.
    “Ah. The mopping-up begins.” Luckett nodded serenely. “No point being stealthy now, eh?”
    Brüks put his head in his hands.
    “Don’t worry, old chap. It’s not over yet, not for you anyway. Jim’s lair. He’s waiting for you.”
    Brüks raised his head. “Jim—but—”
    “I told you,” Luckett said. “According to plan.” Spasms rippled across his body. “Go.” 
    And now Brüks heard another sound, a deeper sound, rumbling up the scale behind the hacking of the maimed and whistling shriek of inbound paralysis. He felt the vibration of great blades spinning up far down in the earth, heard the muffled hiss of steam injected into deep silos. He heard the growing drumbeat of an elemental monster straining against its chains.
    “Now that,” he said, “is more fucking like it.”
    
    <#>
    
    Moore was in his bunker, but he wasn’t running the show. No controls blinked on the smart paint, no sliders or dials or virtual buttons to press. The readouts were all one-way. Somewhere else, the Bicamerals were bringing their engine online; Moore was only watching from the bleachers.
    He turned at Brüks’s approach. “They’re dug in.”
    “Doesn’t matter, though, right? We’re gonna tear them to pieces.”
    The soldier turned back to the wall and shook his head.
    “What’s the problem? They out of range?”
    “We’re not fighting.”
    “Not fighting? Have you seen what they’re doing to us?”
    “I see.”
    “Everyone’s dead or halfway there!”
    “We’re not.”
    “Right.” Nerves sang ominously in Brüks’s fingers. “And how long is that going to last?”
    “Long enough. This bug was customized for Bicamerals. We’ve got more time.” Moore frowned. “You don’t engineer something like that in the field, not overnight. They’ve been planning this a while.” 
    “They didn’t even fire a warning shot, for fucksake! They didn’t even try to negotiate!”
    “They’re scared.”
    “They’re scared.” 
    “They’d assume that giving us any advance warning would put them at an unacceptable disadvantage. They don’t know what we’re capable of.”
    “Then maybe it’s time we showed them.”
    Moore turned back to face the other man. “Perhaps you’re not familiar with Bicameral philosophy. It’s predominantly nonviolent.”
    “You and Luckett and all your friends can argue the philosophical subtleties of unilateral pacifism while we all turn into predominantly nonviolent corpses.” Friends. “Is Lianna—”
    “She’s fine.”
    “None of us are fine.” Brüks turned back to the stairs. Maybe he could find her before the ceiling crashed in. Maybe there was some broom closet he could hide in.
    Moore’s hand closed on his shoulder and spun him as though he were made of balsa.
    “We will not attack these people,” he said calmly. “We don’t know if they’re responsible.”
    “You just said they’d been planning this,” Brüks croaked. “They were just waiting for some kind of excuse. You watched them lock and load. For all I know you listened in on their fucking comm chatter, you heard them give the orders. You know.”
    “Doesn’t matter. Even if we were right there in their command center. Even if we could take their brains apart synapse by synapse and backtrace every neuron that went into the go-ahead. We would still not know.”
    “Fuck you. I’m not going to suck your dick just because you trot out the old no free will shtick.”
    “These people could have been used without their knowledge. They could be slaved to an implanted agenda and they’d swear they were making their own decisions the whole time. We will not kill cat’s-paws.”
    “They’re not zombies, Moore.”
    “Whole different species.”
    “They’re killing us.”
    “You’re just going to have to trust me on this. Or”—Moore cocked his head, evidently amused—“we could leave you behind to hash it out with them personally.”
    “Leave me—?”
    “We’re getting out of here. Why do you think they’re warming up the engine?”
    
    <#>
    
     Someone had rolled a giant soccer ball into the compound. A dozen fallen monks twitched wide-eyed and tetanic around a geodesic sphere of interlocking padded pentagons, maybe four meters across at the equator. A door-size polygon bent back from that surface like a snapped fingernail.
    Some kind of escape pod. No obvious means of propulsion. No onboard propulsion, anyway; but rising high above the walls of the enclosure, the funnel spun and roared like an angry jet engine. Brüks craned his neck in search of the top of the thing, and swallowed, and—
    And looked again. Something was scratching an arc across the sky.
    “Get in,” Moore said at his elbow. “We don’t have much time.”
    Of course they know. They’ve got satellites, they’ve got microdrones, they can look right past these walls and see what we’re doing and just blow it all to shit…
    “Missile…,” he croaked.
    The sky shattered where he was pointing.
    The contrail just stopped high overhead, its descending arc amputated halfway to the jet stream; a new sun bloomed at its terminus, a blinding pinpoint, impossibly small and impossibly bright. Brüks wasn’t sure what he really saw in the flash-blinded split-second that followed. A great flickering hole opening in the morning sky, a massive piece of that dome peeled back as though God Itself had popped the lid off Its terrarium. The sky crinkled: wisps of high-flying cirrus cracking into myriad shards; expanses of deep and endless blue collapsing into sharp-edged facets; half of heaven folded into lunatic origami. The sky imploded and left another sky behind, serene and unscarred.
    A thunderclap split Brüks’s skull like an icepick. The force of it lifted him off his feet, dangled him for an endless moment before dropping him back onto the grass. Something pushed him from behind. He turned; Moore’s mouth was moving, but the only sound Brüks could hear was a high-pitched ringing that filled the world. Past Moore’s shoulder, above the ramparts of the monastery, dark smoldering wreckage fell from the sky like the charred bones of some giant stick man. Its empty skin fled sideways across the sky in ragged pieces, great streamers of tinsel drawn toward the shackled tornado. The vortex engine seemed to draw strength from the meal: it grew thicker, somehow. Faster. Darker.
    Valerie’s invisible airship. He’d forgotten. A hundred thousand cubic meters of hard vacuum directly in the path of the incoming missile: broken on impact, sucking cascades of desert air into the void.
    Moore pushed him toward the sphere. Brüks climbed unsteadily into darkness and the web of some monstrous spider. It was already full of victims, tangled half-seen silhouettes. All hung cocooned in a mesh of broad flat fibers stretching chaotically across the structure’s interior.
    “Move.” A tiny, tinny voice growling through a chorus of tuning forks. Brüks grabbed a convenient band of webbing, gripped as tightly as the sparks in his hand would allow, pulled himself up. Something bumped the side of his head. He turned and recoiled at the face of one of Valerie’s zombies, upside-down, eyes jittering, hanging in the mesh like an entangled bat. Brüks yanked back his hand; the webbing stuck as though he were a gecko. He pulled free, clambered up and away from those frantic eyes, that lifeless face. 
    Another face, not so dead, hung in the gloom behind its bodyguard. Brüks—irises still clenched against the morning sun—couldn’t make out details. But he could feel it watching him, could feel the predator grin behind the eyes. He kept moving. Sticky bands embraced at his touch, peeled gently free as he pulled away.
    “Any empty spot,” Moore said, climbing up in his wake. The ringing in Brüks’s ears was fading at last, as if somehow absorbed by this obscene womb and its litter of freaks and monsters. “Try to keep away from the walls; they’re padded, but it’s going to be a rough ride.”
    The hatch swung into place like the last piece of a jigsaw, sealed them in and cut off the meager light filtering from outside; instantly the air grew dense and close, a small stagnant bubble at the bottom of the sea. Brüks swallowed. The darkness breathed around him with unseen mouths, a quiet claustrophobic chorus muffled by air heavy as cement.
    Vision and ventilation returned within a breath of each other: a stale breeze across his cheek, a dim red glow from the padded facets of the wall itself. Bicamerals blocked the light on all sides: some spread-eagled, some balled up, a couple of pretzel silhouettes that spoke either of superhuman flexibility or broken bones. Maybe a dozen all told. 
    A dozen monks. A prehistoric psychopath with an entourage of brain-dead killing machines. Two baseline humans. All hanging together in a giant cobwebbed uterus, waiting for some unseen army to squash them flat.
    All part of the plan.
    Brüks tried to move, found that the webbing had tightened around him once he’d stopped climbing. He could wriggle like a hooked fish, bring his hand up far enough to scratch his nose. Beyond that he wasn’t going anywhere. 
    His eyes were adapting to the longwave, at least. A face overhead resolved into welcome familiarity: “Lianna? Lianna, are you…”
    Only her body was here. Its fingers tapped the side of its head with the telltale rhythm of someone tuned to a more distant reality.
    “It’s okay.” Moore spoke quietly from somewhere nearby. “She’s talking to our ride.”
    “This is it? Twenty people?” He gulped air, still strangely stale for all the efforts of the local life-support system.
    “It’s enough.”
    Brüks could barely catch his breath. The whole compartment hissed with the sound of forced ventilation, air washed across his face and still he couldn’t seem to fill his lungs.
    He fought rising panic. “I think—there’s something wrong with the air conditioner…”
    “The air’s fine. Relax.”
    “No, it—”
    Something kicked them, hard in the side. Suddenly up was sideways; suddenly, sideways was down. Blood rushed to Brüks’s head. A giant stood on his chest. The air, already unbearably close, got closer: the stench of rotten eggs flooded Brüks’s sinuses like a tsunami.
    Jesus Christ, he thought. He couldn’t imagine a worse time or place for a fart. Under other circumstances it might have been funny. Now it only made him gag, stole whatever meager oxygen had remained.
    “Here we go,” Moore murmured from behind. From below. From overhead.
    He sounded almost sleepy.
    The web slewed. Bodies jerked in unison one way, slung like pendulums back the other, flipped around some arbitrary unknowable center of gravity. They seemed to be accelerating in ten directions at once. Niagara roared in Brüks’s head.
    “Can’t— breathe…”
    “You’re not supposed to. Go with it.”
    “What—”
    “Isoflurane. Hydrogen sulfide.”
    Whirling static engulfed the world from the outside in. Twenty bodies—barely visible through the maelstrom—threw themselves as one toward some unremarkable point on the far side of the compartment. They strained toward that point like iron filings drawn to a cyclotron, their elastic shackles strained almost to the breaking point.
    So, Brüks mused as his vision failed. This is it. The final conscious experience.
    Enjoy it while it lasts.

   <ct>Parasite

      
      
      <epi>The essential wickedness of this approach is perhaps best exemplified by the so-called Moksha Mind engineered by the Eastern Dharmic Alliance. Their attempts to “modernize” their faith—through the embrace of technology that has been (rightly) banned in the West—resulted in a literally soul-destroying hive that has plunged millions into what we can only assume to be a state of deep catatonia. (The fact that this is exactly what the Dharmic faiths have aspired to for millennia does not render their fate any less tragic.) The misguided use of brain interface technology to “commune” with the minds of such alien creatures as cats and octopi—a practice by no means limited to the East—has also resulted in untold psychological damage.
      At the opposite extreme, in the face of modern challenges we may find ourselves tempted to simply turn our backs on the wider world. Such a retreat would not only go against the Scriptural admonition to “go and make disciples of all nations,” but also risks dire consequence in its own right. The Redeemer Gyland offers a stark case in point. It has been almost a year since the alliance between the Southern and Central Baptists broke down, and three months since we have been able to establish contact with anyone from either side of that conflict. (It is no longer practical to board the gyland directly—any craft approaching within two kilometers is fired upon—but remote surveillance has yielded no evidence of human activity since March 28. The UN believes that the weapons fire is automated, and has declared Redeemer off-limits until those defenses exhaust their ammunition.)
      
      <eps>—An Enemy Within: The Bicameral Threat to Institutional
      Religion in the Twenty-First Century (An Internal Report to
       the Holy See by the Pontifical Academy of Sciences, 2093)
     <epi>I could be bounded in a nutshell, and count myself a king of 
     infinite space—were it not that I have bad dreams.
     <eps>—William Shakespeare

    He awoke to screams and gray blurry light, a kick in the side, a bolt of pain spiking up his left leg like an electric javelin. He cried out but his voice was lost in some greater cacophony: the sound of torquing metal, vast alloy bones shearing across unaccustomed stress lines. Gravity was all wrong. He was on his back but it tugged him sideways, pulled him feetfirst through some translucent rubbery amnion that enveloped his body. Vague shapes loomed and shifted beyond. Down near the subsonic the world groaned like a humpback whale, wounded, spiraling toward a distant seabed. Alarms shrieked on higher frequencies.
    I’m in a body bag, he thought, panicking. They think I’m dead…
    Maybe I am...
    The pain settled excruciatingly in his ankle. Brüks brought up his hands; weak elastic forces resisted the motion. His veins and arteries were all on the outside, clinging to his skin. No, not arteries. Myoelectric tensors—
    The world jerked down and sideways. Exhausted metal fell silent; the alarm seemed to bleat all the louder in the absence of competition. Something stabbed Brüks through the body bag, just below the knee. The pain vanished. 
    A blurry shadow leaned down. “Easy, soldier. I’ve got you.”
    Moore.
    The membrane split like an opening eye. The Colonel stood over him, leaning thirty degrees off true in a world sliding downhill. The world itself was tiny, a cylindrical bubble five meters across and maybe half that high, floor and walls and roof crazily askew. Something ran through its center like a wireframe spinal cord (Access ladder, Brüks realized dimly: this world had an attic, a basement). Towers of plastic cubes, a meter on a side—some white, some gunmetal, some darkly transparent (the blurry things inside glistened like internal organs) loomed on all sides like standing stones, geckoed one to another. A few had come loose and settled in an uneven pile at the downhill end of the chamber. Gravity urged Brüks to join them there; if his bag hadn’t been fastened to its pallet he would have slid right off the end.
    Moore reached out and touched some control past Brüks’s line-of-sight; the alarms fell mercifully silent. “How you holding up?” the soldier asked.
    “I’m—” Brüks shook his head, tried to clear it. “What’s happening?”
    “Spoke must have torqued.” Moore reached down/across and peeled something off Brüks’s head: a second membranous scalp, a skullcap studded with a grid of tiny nubs. “Loose cube got you. Your ankle’s broken. Nothing we can’t fix once we get you out of here.”
    There was grass on the walls— meter-wide strips of blue-green grass running from floor to ceiling, alternating with the pipes and grills and concave service panels that disfigured the rest of the bulkhead. (Amped phycocyanin, he remembered from somewhere.) Smart paint glowed serenely from any surface that wasn’t given over to photosynthesis. His pallet folded down from an indentation in the wall; a little stack of time-series graphs flickered there, reporting on the state of his insides.
    “We’re in orbit,” he realized.
    Moore nodded.
    “We’re—they hit us—”
    Moore smiled faintly. “Who, exactly?”
    “We were under attack...”
    “That was a while ago. On the ground.”
    “Then—” Brüks swallowed. His ears popped. He’d never been to space before, but he recognized the layout: off-the-shelf hab module, two levels, common as dead satellites from LEO to geosync. You’d sling them around a centrifugal hub to fake gravity. Which would normally be vectored perpendicular to the deck, not—
    He tried to keep his voice steady. “What’s going on?” 
    “Meteorite strike, maybe. Bad structural component.” Moore shrugged. “Alien abduction, for all I know. Anything’s possible when you don’t have any hard intel to go on.”
    “You don’t—”
    “I’m as blind as you are right now, Dr. Brüks. No ConSensus, no intercom. The line must’ve broken when the spoke torqued. I’ll be able to reconnect as soon as someone boosts the signal on the upstream node, but I imagine they have more important things on their minds right now.” He laid a hand on Brüks’s shoulder. “Relax, Doctor. Help is on the way. Can’t you feel it?”
    “I—” Brüks hesitated, lifted one rubbery arm, let it drop down/sideways; it seemed to weigh a bit less than it had before.
    “They’ve shut off the centrifuge,” Moore confirmed. “We’re spinning down smoothly. That suggests the rest of the ship is more or less okay.”
    Brüks’s ears popped again. “We’re not. I think—I think there’s an air leak somewhere.”
    “You noticed.”
    “Shouldn’t we be patching it?”
    “Have to find it first. Tell you what: I’ll move the cargo, you tear apart all these bulkheads.”
    “But—”
    “Or we can go downstairs, suit up, and get out of here.” He split Brüks’s cocoon open the rest of the way, helped steady him as he sat up. “Can you walk?”
    Brüks swung his legs over the edge of the pallet, trying to ignore the subtle sense of pressure building behind his eyes. He gripped its edge to keep from staggering down the skewed deck. Myoelectric tattoos ran the length of his naked body like an impoverished exoskeleton. They traced the bones of his arms and legs, forked out along his toes and—(he flexed his right foot; the left hung insensate at the end of his ankle like a lump of clay)—over his heels and across his soles as well. Every movement met with rubber resistance. Every gesture was a small exercise.
    Isometric muscle toner. They used them in Heaven sometimes, to keep the Ascended from curling into flabby fetuses. They still used them on those rare deep-space missions where the crew hadn’t been preseasoned with vampire genes, to help in the rearguard fight against the shortening of tendons, the wasting of muscles during hibernation.
    Moore helped him stand, offered his body as a crutch. Brüks bounced uncertainly on his good foot, his arm around the other man’s shoulders. It wasn’t as bad as he’d feared. Pseudograv pulled everything in the wrong direction but it was weak, and getting weaker.
    “What am I doing here?” Hop-step-lean. Soft crimson light pulsed from the hole in the ceiling where the ladder emerged, staining the adjacent bulkhead.
    “Getting to safety.”
    “No, I mean—” He gestured with his free arm, took in the containers stacked on all sides. “Why am I in the hold?”
    “The hold’s aft. We’re using this for the overflow.”
    The rails of the ladder were the color of rawhide, and smooth as plastic; some elastic polymer that stayed taut along a range of lengths. Brüks reached out and grabbed a rung, looked up through the ceiling and discovered the source of that bloody glow: an emergency hatch sealed tight, flashing a warning to any who might be contemplating passage: UNPRESSURIZED.
    “My point is—” He looked through the hole in the floor: more metacubes down there, assemblages of smaller units stuck together. “Why did you wake me up in the basement?”
    “You weren’t supposed to wake up at all; we had you in a therapeutic coma.” Brüks remembered being scalped: that skullcap, stippled with electrodes. “You’re lucky I happened to be in the neighborhood when things went south.”
    “Are you saying you stored me with—”
    The hab lurched, jumped in some sideways direction Brüks’s inner ears couldn’t parse; suddenly the ladder was slipping diagonally past, suddenly he was falling through the floor (the edge of the hatch bit his ribs in passing). A giant’s building blocks, stacked together, would have snapped his spine under earth gravity; here they merely bent it and bounced him back into the air.
    Moore caught him on the rebound: “Well, that’s one way of making the trip...”
    Brüks thrashed in his arms, pushed him away: “Get the fuck off of me!”
    “Calm down, sol—”
    “I’m not your fucking soldier!” Brüks tried to stand in the crowded space; his wounded ankle twisted under him as though attached by rubber bands. “I’m a parasitologist, I was down in the goddamn desert minding my own business. I didn’t ask to get caught up in your gang war, I didn’t ask to get my ass shot into fucking orbit, and I sure as shit didn’t ask to get stored down in your basement like a box of Christmas ornaments!”
    Moore waited until he’d run out of words. “Are you finished?”
    Brüks fumed and glared. Moore took his silence for a yes. “I apologize for the inconvenience,” he said drily. “Once things have calmed down a bit, maybe we can check in with your wife. Tell her you’re working late.”
    Brüks closed his eyes. “I haven’t checked in with my wife,” he said through gritted teeth, “in years.” My real wife, anyway.
    “Really.” Moore refused to take the hint. “Why not?”
    “She’s in Heaven.”
    “Huh.” Moore grunted. Then, more softly: “So’s mine.”
    Brüks rolled his eyes. “Small world.” His ears popped again. “Are we going to get out of here before our blood starts boiling?”
    “Let’s go, then,” Moore said.
    Up past a leaning cityscape of cargo cubes, man-size alcoves flanked an ovoid airlock, two to each side. Spacesuits hung there like flensed silver skins, held in place by cargo straps. They billowed gently at the knees and elbows. Moore helped Brüks across the slanted deck, passed him a loose cargo strap to cling to while unbuckling the suit in the leftmost alcove; it sagged sideways into the soldier’s arms.
    A breeze hissed softly against Brüks’s cheek. Moore held out the suit: gutted from crotch to neck, a split exoskeleton shed by some previous owner. Brüks stood angled and bouncing slightly on his good foot, let Moore guide his bad one into the suit. The low gravity helped; by now Brüks couldn’t have weighed more than ten kilos. He felt like some overgrown pupa plagued by second thoughts, trying to climb back into its husk.
    An itch crawled across the back of his free hand; he held it up, eyed the blood-brown tracery of elastic filaments webbed across the skin. “Why—”
    “So what’s she in for?” Moore asked, jerking Brüks’s leg hard to seat his injured foot in its boot. Bits of bone ground against each other down there—his tibia carried the vibration past whatever nerve block Moore had installed. It didn’t hurt. Brüks grimaced anyway.
    “Uh, what?”
    “Your wife.” The right leg was trickier, without the left to stand on; Moore offered himself as a crutch again. “What’s she in Heaven for?”
    “That’s a strange way of putting it,” Brüks remarked. 
    I’m sick of it, she’d said softly, looking out the window. They’re alive, Dan. They’re sapient.
    Moore shrugged. “Everyone’s running from something.”
    They’re just systems, he’d reminded her. Engineered.
    So are we, she’d said. He hadn’t argued with her; she’d known better. Neither of them had been engineered, not unless you counted natural selection as some kind of designer and neither of them was woolly-minded enough to entertain such sloppy thinking. She hadn’t wanted an argument anyway; she’d been long past the verbal jousts that had kept them sparking all those years. Now, she’d only wanted to be left alone.
    “She—retired,” he told Moore as his right foot slid smoothly into its boot.
    “From what?”
    He’d respected her wishes. Left her alone when she’d lobotomized her last victim, left her alone to tender her resignation. He’d wanted to reach out when she’d started eyeing Heaven, would have done anything to keep her on his side of the afterlife, but by then it was long past being about what he wanted. So he’d left her alone even when she leased out her brain to pay her rent in the Collective Conscious, withdrew from the outer world to the inner. She’d left a link behind, at least. He could always talk to her, there on Styx’s farthest shore. She always honored her obligations. But he’d known that’s all it was, so even then—after she’d stopped slaughtering artificial systems and started being one—he left her alone.
    “She was a cloud-killer,” Brüks said at last.
    “Huh,” Moore grunted. Then, helping Brüks’s arms into their sleeves: “Not a very good one, I hope.”
    “Why?”
    “Let’s just say that not every distributed AI’s emergent, and not every emergent AI’s rogue.” Moore handed over his gauntlets. “We don’t publicize it, but every now and then some of the better CKs have been known to pick targets we’d really rather they didn’t.”
    Brüks swallowed on a throat gone suddenly dry. “The fucked-up thing is, she agreed with them. The AI Rights idiots, I mean. She quit because she got sick of killing conscious beings whose only crime was—” How had she put it? “Growing up too fast.”
    Suit zipped up. Gauntlets clicked into place. A solid yank on the boa-cord and the suit squirmed around him, cinching from flaccid to skintight in a few disquieting seconds. Moore handed him the helmet: “Seat it facing your three, turn counterclockwise until it clicks. Keep the visor up until I say.”
    “Really?” Brüks was starting to feel light-headed. “The air seems a little—thin...”
    “Plenty of time.” Moore grabbed another suit off the wall. “I don’t want your hearing compromised.” He bounced off the deck, brought knees to chest and spread his suit open with both hands. With one fluid motion he kicked his legs straight back onto the deck, suited to the waist. He bounced lightly.
    “So she wasn’t afraid of the conscious AIs.” Moore shrugged arms into sleeves. “How about the smart ones?” 
    “W-What?”
    “Smart AIs.” He clicked his own helmet into place. “Was she afraid of them?”
    Brüks gulped oily alpine air and tried to concentrate. The smart ones. Past that minimum complexity threshold where networks wake up: past the Sapience Limit where they go to sleep again, where self-awareness dissolves in the vaster reaches of networks grown too large, in the signal lags that reduce synchrony to static. Up where intelligence continues to grow even though the self has been left behind. 
    “Those, she—was a little worried about,” he admitted, trying to ignore the faint roaring in his ears.
    “Smart woman.” The Colonel’s voice was strangely tinny. He leaned over and checked Brüks’s seals and sockets with precise mechanical efficiency, nodded. “Okay, drop your visor,” he said, dropping his.
    A louder hiss replaced the fainter one: a blessed wash of fresh air caressed Brüks’s face the moment his visor sealed. Relief flooded in a moment later. An arcane mosaic of icons and acronyms flickered to life across the crystal.
    Moore’s helmet bumped against his own, his voice buzzing distantly across the makeshift connection: “It’s a saccadal interface. Comm tree’s upper left.” Sure enough an amber star blinked there: a knock at the door. Brüks focused his gaze just so and accepted the call.
    “That’s better.” Suddenly, it was as though Moore was speaking from right inside Brüks’s helmet.
    “Let’s get out of here,” Brüks said.
    Moore held his arm out, watched it drop. “Not quite yet. Another minute or two.” 
    Out beyond Brüks’s helmet, the air—the lack of it, maybe—grew somehow hard. Through that impoverished atmosphere and two layers of convex crystal, Jim Moore’s face was calm and cryptic.
    “What about yours?” he asked after a moment.
     “My what?” 
    “Your wife. What was she—in for?”
    “Yes. Helen.” A frown may have flickered across Moore’s face then, but it was gone in an instant and he was answering before Brüks had a chance to regret the question. “She just got— tired, I suppose. Or maybe scared.” His gaze dropped for a moment. “Twenty-first century’s not for everyone.”
    “When did she ascend?”
    “Almost fourteen years ago now.”
    “Firefall.” A lot of people had fled into Heaven after that. A lot of the Ascended had even come back.
    But Moore was shaking his head. “Just before, actually. Literally minutes before. We all said good-bye, and then we went outside and I looked up...”
    “Maybe she knew something.”
    Moore smiled faintly, held out his arm. Brüks watched it drift back to his side, slow as a feather. “Almost—”
    The hab lurched. Cubes and cartons teetered and wobbled against their mutual attraction; rogue containers lifted from the deck and bumped against the walls in a ponderous ballet. Brüks and Moore, tethered to their cargo straps, drifted like seaweed.
    “—time to go.” Moore dialed open the inner hatch. Brüks pulled himself along in the other man’s wake.
    “Jim.” 
    “Right here.” Moore pulled a spring-loaded clasp from a little disk at his waist. A bright thread unspooled behind it.
    “Why were you here? When things went south?” 
    “I was on patrol.” Fastening the clasp to a cleat on Brüks own suit. “Walking the perimeter.”
    “What?”
    “You heard me.” The inner hatch squeezed down behind them.
    Brüks tugged on the thread while Moore went through the motions of depressurizing the ’lock: impossibly fine, impossibly strong. A leash of engineered spider silk.
    “You’ve got a ConSensus feed in your head,” Brüks pointed out. “You can see any place on the network without getting off the toilet and you walk the perimeter?” 
    “Twice a day. Going on thirty years. You should be thankful I’ve never seen any reason to stop.” One gauntleted hand made a small flourish toward the outer hatch. “Shall we go?”
    Moore, you old warhorse. 
    I’m alive thanks to you. I pass out inside a tornado, I wake up with a smashed ankle on a space station with a broken back. You get me into this suit. You get me to natter on about my wife so I barely even notice the air bleeding away around us. 
    I bet you’ll never tell me how close we came, will you? Not your style. You were too busy distracting me from making a complete panicking ass of myself while you saved my life.
    “Thank you,” he said softly, but if Moore—tapping out some incantation on the bulkhead interface—even heard him, he gave no sign.
    The outer airlock irised open. The great wide universe waited beyond. 
    And the magnitude of all Jim Moore’s well-intentioned lies spread naked across the heavens for anyone to see.
    
    <#>
    
    “Welcome to the Crown of Thorns,” Moore said from the other end of the universe.
    The sun was too large, too blinding: Brüks saw that as soon as the outer hatch opened, in the instant before a polarizing disk bloomed on his faceplate—perfectly line of sight—to cut the glare. Of course, he thought at first, no atmosphere. Things were bound to be brighter in orbit.
    And then he stumbled out in Moore’s wake, and toppled weightlessly around some lopsided center of mass while stars and vast structures spun around him.
    The Earth was gone.
    That wasn’t true, he knew in some distant hypothetical place that made absolutely no difference. It couldn’t be true. Earth was still out there somewhere; one of those billion bright shards lacerating the heavens on all sides. Unwinking pixels, all of them. Not a single one close enough to rise above zero dimensions, to actually assume a shape.
    No ground to fall to.
    His breath rasped in his ears, fast as a heartbeat. “You said we were in orbit.”
    “We are. Not around Earth.”
    The ship—the Crown of Thorns—spread before him like the bones of some city-size monster. The broken spoke hung directly ahead, a tangle of struts and tubes suffused in a glittering sharp-edged halo: bits of foil, crystals of frozen liquid, little shurikens of metal with nowhere else to go. Things moved in that mosaic of light and shadow. Metal spiders swarmed across the wreckage, spot-welding with incandescent mandibles, spinning webs to suture shattered pieces back together. Tiny starbursts sparkled across the metalscape in waves.
    Not bent. Not torqued. Broken. Snapped clean off. Horrified, Brüks took in the sight of a slender silver cable, its diameter barely that of a human finger: a lone tendon, miraculously intact, emerging from the amputated stump and stretching across vacuum to anchor the massive barrel-shaped hab at his back. If not for that one frail thread…
    “You knew about this, didn’t you?” He gulped air. “You’ve been hooked into ConSensus all along…”
    Moore hung off a handhold, utterly unconcerned by the billions of light-years stretching away beneath his feet. “In my experience, it’s generally better to ease people into these situations a little at a time.”
    “It’s not my exp—exper—” His tongue was swelling in his mouth. He couldn’t seem to catch his breath. Nowhere was up, nowhere was down—
    “My air—”
    Something smacked the sole of his boot; absurdly, down clicked back into place. Moore was in front of him, hands on his shoulders, squeezing through the suit: “It’s okay. It’s okay. Close your eyes.”
    Brüks squeezed them tight.
    “You’re just hyperventilating,” Moore said from the darkness. “The suit’ll thin the mix before you run any serious risk of passing out. You’re perfectly safe.”
    Brüks almost laughed aloud at that. “You—” he managed, “are The Boy Who Cried Safe…”
    “You must be feeling better,” Moore observed.
    He was, a little.
    “Try opening your eyes. Focus on the ship, not the stars. Take your time. Get your bearings.”
    Brüks opened them a crack. Vacuum and vertigo came flooding in.
    Focus on the ship.
    Okay. The ship.
    Start with this spoke. Truncated, cauterized, one of—one of six (the others apparently undamaged), radiating from a spherical hub like the skeleton of an impoverished bicycle wheel: no rim, nothing but a tin can at the end of each spoke. A few minutes ago those spokes had been slinging their habs around like stones on strings; now they just hung there. A smaller baton—a giant’s femur skewered through the midpoint—hung equally motionless just fore of the Hub. (Counterspinning flywheel, probably. To neuter the torque.)
    Fifty meters long at least, those hollow bones. This insane Ferris wheel stretched over a hundred meters from side to side. 
    But it was an ephemeral contraption of twigs and straws next to the wall of metal looming behind it. The drive section. Seen from dead-on it would be a disk: a whole landscape turned on edge, a hard-edged topography of ridges and trenches and right angles. But out here on the wounded rim, Brüks could see the mass piled up behind that leading edge: not so much a disk as a core sample extracted from some artificial moon. The striated faces of sedimentary cliffs, carved in metal; monstrous gnarled arteries twisting along the patchwork hull, carrying rivers of fuel or coolant. The arc of a distant engine nozzle, peeking past that metal horizon like a dull sunrise.
    A cylindrical silo squatted dead center atop the drive section. Cargo hold, perhaps. The Crown’s backbone emerged from its apex like a sapling sprouting from the stump of a great redwood. All this forward superstructure—the Hub and its habs, the flywheel, a hemispherical nose assembly bristling with antennae—none of it mattered in the shadow of those engines. Just a few fragile twigs in which meat might huddle and breathe. Fleas clinging to the back of a captive sun. 
    “This thing is huge,” Brüks whispered to Moore. But Moore wasn’t there anymore; he was sailing spread-eagled across the gap between this dangling hab and its severed spoke. Moore was deserting him for an army of spiders.
    Something tugged on Brüks’s tether. He turned, icewater trickling along his spine, to see what new master held his leash.
    “You come with me,” Valerie said.
    
    <#>
    
    She yanked him across the void like bait on a hook, faster than even his brain stem could react. By the time it reached out to snatch a passing holdfast—before it could even look around to find one—they were already arcing through clouds of jagged tinsel. Torn scaffolding reached out as he tumbled past; miraculously, none tore his suit.
    He was falling down a well—Not a well. The spoke. The broken spoke. He could see its ragged mouth receding above him. He hit bottom, landed hard on his back; elastic inertia tried to bounce him off but a pile-driver slammed against his chest and held him fast. Blood-orange light pulsed at the edge of his eye. He sucked in great panicky gulps of air, turned his head.
    The pile-driver extended from Valerie’s shoulder. Her other hand worked controls set into the dropgate they’d landed on. Crimson light flashed at two-second intervals around its edge. 
    “Moore—” Brüks gasped.
    “Wastes too much time on you already, Cold Cut. He helps with repairs.” A hatch split open in the center of the dropgate. Valerie pitched him through one-handed. Something caught him like a catcher’s mitt on the other side: a resilient membrane, stretched between hoops of tensile ribbing. Vacuum sucked at that translucent skin, stretched it tightly convex between those reinforcements.
    Valerie sealed the hatch behind them. The little tent inflated instantly, its skin relaxing as the gradient leveled. 
    Tingling in the fingers of Brüks’s left hand; clenched tight, he realized. He forced them open, was vaguely surprised to see a little piece of shrapnel floating on his palm. Its edges weren’t entirely jagged. The metal had flowed and congealed in spots, like candle wax.
    He must have grabbed it in passing.
    The tent split like a clamshell. Valerie dragged him out before it had fully opened, pulled him along a tunnel of pale watery light. A headless brown serpent convulsed along its length, coils slapping the bulkheads with random energy: some kind of elastic cord, thick as his wrist and intermittently studded with little hoops. The rungs of a ladder, too far apart for merely human reach, strobed past on the bulkhead. Occasional flourishes of yellow-and-black hazard striping, flashing by too quickly for any glimpse of whatever they warned against. Brüks craned his neck, eyes forward. Sometime in the past few seconds Valerie had raised her visor. Her face was gray in the shade of her helmet, all planes and angles. Bones and no flesh.
    The spoke ended in a slotted dome, like one of those antique telescopes left to rot on mountaintops after astronomy had moved offworld. Most of that slot was blocked by the socket on the other side. They ricocheted through the gap that remained.
     They emerged into the space between two concentric spheres: a silvery inner core, like a great blob of mercury three meters across; an outer shell, dull and unreflective, containing it.  Some kind of grille split the space between into hemispheres, joined crust to core at the equator. Valerie dragged him across the bowl of the aft hemisphere: around a cubist landscape of cargo modules, past the mouth of a gaping tunnel at the south pole (the spine of the ship, Brüks realized; shadows and scaffolds receded down its throat); past the ball-and-socket assemblies of other spokes, arrayed around that opening like a corolla. Brüks caught flickers of motion through the equatorial grille—personnel in the other hemisphere, otherwise occupied as Valerie dragged him to his fate—but in the next instant they were diving down another one of the Crown’s long bones and the faint tinny voice he might have heard through his sealed helmet—
    —Fuck me the roach is up!—
    —could just as well have been imagination.
    Another long fall; this time they were being towed. The serpent in this spoke was intact, a moving belt stretched pencil-thin between pulleys at each end. Valerie still gripped Brüks’s wrist with one iron hand. The other was locked around one of the hoops (handholds, Brüks realized; stirrups) on the conveyer’s outbound leg. The inbound line streamed past just a meter or two to his left, heading back to the Hub. In some hopeful parallel fantasy world, Brüks broke free and seized one of those hoops to make his escape. 
    Another terminus—this one innocent of shrapnel or wreckage, just a U-turn and a ledge around an open hatch festooned with a bit of signage:
    
    <sign>MAINTENANCE & REPAIR
    
    Now they were through. Now he was free, floating in a hab like the one he’d just escaped. Bulkheads, panels, gengineered strips of photosynthetic foliage. Coffin-size outlines, subtly convex, on the bulkhead: pallets like the one he’d awakened on, folded into the wall while not in use. More of those ubiquitous cubes, stuck and stacked high enough to turn half the compartment into a burrow: a spectrum of colors, a riot of icons. Brüks recognized some of the symbols—power tools, fab-matter stockpiles, the stylized Asclepian staff that meant medical. Others might as well have been scribbled by aliens. 
    “Catch.”
    He turned, flinched, brought his hands up barely in time to grab the box sailing toward him. It might have held a large pizza, judging by size and shape; maybe three of them, stacked. Scasers, adhesives, bladders of synthetic blood nestled in molded depressions under its lid. Some kind of bare-bones first-aid kit.
    “Fix it.”
    Somehow Valerie had already stripped down to her coverall, geckoed her abandoned spacesuit to the wall like a crumpled wad of aluminum foil. Her left arm was extended, wrist up, sleeve rolled back. Her forearm bent just slightly, halfway down its length. Not even vampires had joints there.
    “What—how did—”
    “The ship breaks. Shit happens.” Her lips drew back. Her teeth looked almost translucent in the glassy light. “Fix it.”
    “But—my ankle—”
    Suddenly they were eye to eye. Brüks reflexively dropped his gaze: a lamb in a lion’s presence, no recourse beyond obeisance, no hope beyond prayer. 
    “Two injured elements,” Valerie whispered. “One mission-critical, one ballast. Which gets priority?”
    “But I don’t—”
    “You’re a biologist.”
    “Yes but—”
    “An expert. On life.”
    “Y—yes…”
    “So fix it.”
    He tried to meet her eyes, and couldn’t, and cursed himself. “I’m not a medical—”
    “Bones are bones.” From the corner of his eye he saw her head tilt, as if weighing alternatives. “You can’t do this, what good are you?”
    “There must be some kind of sick bay on board,” he stammered. “A, an infirmary.”
    The vampire’s eyes flickered to the hatch overhead, to the label it framed: MAINTENANCE & REPAIR. “A biologist,” she said, something like mirth in her voice, “and you think there’s a difference.”
    This is insane, he thought. Is this is some kind of test?
    If so, he was failing it.
    He held his breath and his tongue, kept his eyes on the injury: closed fracture, thank Christ. No skin breaks, no visible contusions. At least the break hadn’t torn any major blood vessels. 
    Or had it? Didn’t vampires—that’s right, they vasoconstricted most of the time, kept most of their blood sequestered in the core. This creature’s radial artery could be ripped wide open and she might never even feel it until she went into hunting mode…
    Maybe give her prey a fighting chance, at least…
    He tamped down on the thought, irrationally terrified that she might be able to see it flickering there in his skull. He focused on the bend instead: leave it, or try to reseat the bone? (Leave it, he remembered from somewhere. Keep movement to a minimum, reduce the risk of shredding nerves and blood vessels…) 
    He pulled a roll of splinting tape from the kit, snapped off a few thirty-centimeter lengths (long enough to extend past the wrist—it was starting to come back). He laid them down equidistantly around Valerie’s arm (God she’s cold), pressed gently into the flesh (Don’t hurt her, don’t fucking hurt her) until the adhesive took and hardened the splints into place. He backed away as the vampire flexed and turned and examined his handiwork.
    “Not set straight,” she remarked. 
    He swallowed. “No, I thought—this is just temp—”
    She reached across with her right hand and broke her own forearm like a sapling. Two of the splints snapped with a sound of tiny gunshots; the third simply ripped free of the flesh, tearing the skin.
    The fascia beneath was bloodless as paraffin.
    She extended the refractured arm. “Do it again.”
    Holy shit, Brüks thought.
    Fuck fuck fuck.
    Not a test, he realized. Never a test, not with this thing. A game. A sick sadistic game, a cat playing with a mouse...
    Valerie waited, patient and empty, less than two meters from his jugular.
    Keep going. Don’t give her an excuse.
    He took her arm in his hands again. He clenched tight to keep them from shaking; she didn’t seem to notice. The break was worse now, the bend sharper; bone pushed up from beneath the muscles, raised a knotty little hillock under the skin. A purple bruise was leaking into existence at its summit.
    He still couldn’t meet her eyes.
    He grabbed her wrist with one hand, braced against the cup of her elbow with the other, pulled. It was like trying to stretch steel: the cables in her arm seemed too tough, too tightly sprung for mere flesh. He tried again, yanked as hard as he could; he was the one who whimpered aloud.
    But the limb stretched a little, and the broken pieces within ground audibly one against another, and when he let go the lumpy protuberance had disappeared.
    Please let this be enough.
    He left the broken splints in place, laid down new lengths of tape adjacent. Pressed and waited as they grew rigid.
    “Better,” Valerie said. Brüks allowed himself a breath.
    Crack. Snap.
    “Again,” Valerie said.
    “What’s wrong with you?” The words were out before he could catch them. Brüks froze in their wake, terrified at the prospect of her reaction.
    She bled. The bone was visible now beneath stretched skin, like a jagged deadhead in murky water. The contusion around it expanded as he watched, a bloody stain spreading through wax. But no, not wax, not anymore; the pallor was fading from Valerie’s flesh. Blood was seeping from the core, perfusing the peripheral tissues. The vampire—warmed—
    She’s vasodilating, he realized. She’s switching into hunting mode. Not a game after all, not even an excuse.
    A trigger…
    “I’ve got it,” said a voice from behind.
    Brüks tried to turn. Valerie’s impassive gaze pinned him like a butterfly.
    “No, really.” A pale flash, a beige jumpsuit. Lianna coasted into view and braked against the wall. “I can finish up here. I think your guys need some supervision out on the hull anyway.” 
    Valerie’s eyes flickered to her broken arm, back to Brüks. He blinked and she was gone.
    “Let’s get you out of that suit,” Lianna said, unscrewing his helmet. 
    She’d cut her hair. Her dreads ended along the jawline now.
    Brüks sagged and shook his head. “How can you talk to her like that?”
    “What? I just—talk.” The helmet tumbled off across the compartment. Brüks fumbled with zippers and clasps, still quaking; Lianna unlocked his gauntlets. “Nothing special.” 
    “No, I mean—” He took a breath. “Doesn’t she scare the shit out of you?”
    “Yeah, I suppose.” She glanced at the first-aid kit drifting to one side. “Holy shit, she had you using that?”
    “That creature is fucking insane.”
    Lianna shrugged. “By human standards, sure. Then again—” She tapped the bulkhead with her toe: a diagnostic pallet unfolded from its dimple in the wall. “Not much point in bringing them all the way back from the Pleistocene if their brains worked just like ours, right?”
    “Weren’t you afraid?”
    She seemed to think about that for a moment. “Guess I was, in a way. I mean, predator-prey, right? Gut response.”
    “Exactly.”
    “Chinedum said there was nothing to worry about.” She gestured him over to the pallet; he floated into place, let her strap him down around the waist. Biotelemetry readouts bloomed across the bulkhead.
    “And you believed him. Them.”  It. Whatever the pronoun was for Hive.
    “Of course.” She ran her finger down the stack of biosigns, winced at something she saw there. “Okay, let’s see what we’ve got.” 
    She cast her gaze around the compartment (“We should really get around to unpacking this stuff sometime”), opened a silver crate tagged with medical icons. A few seconds of rummaging turned up a scaffolding gun from the instrument trays stacked within. She dialed it to OSTEO and set the muzzle against his broken ankle. “You’re nerve-blocked, right?”
    He nodded. “Jim shot me up with something.”
    “Good. ’Cause otherwise this would really hurt.” She fired. Brüks’s leg jumped reflexively; he caught a glimpse of black filaments, fine as filaria, lashing frantic tails before they burrowed into his flesh and disappeared.
    “Might itch for a bit once the block wears off.” Lianna was already scanning the compartment for other treasures. “Takes a while for the mesh to line itself up when you’re dealing with all those little bones—ah.” An off-ivory cube, this time—no, a transparent one. It took its color from the viscous casting putty inside: the stuff quivered like gelatin when she cracked the lid. 
    There must have been enough in there to put ten people into full-body casts. Brüks glanced around while Lianna scooped up a handful; at least a half dozen other crates were filled with the same stuff.
    The putty squirmed in Lianna’s hand, aroused by her body heat. “Where are we going?” Brüks wondered. “How many broken bones are you expecting when we get there?” 
    “Oh, they don’t expect anything. They just like being prepared.” She slapped the goop onto his ankle. “Hold still until it sets.” It slithered around the joint like a monstrous amoeba, fused to itself, crept a few centimeters up his calf and down around his heel before slowing and hardening in the oxygen atmosphere.
    “There.” Lianna was back at the cube, resealing it before the rest of its contents crusted over. “You’ll have to wear that for a few days, I’m afraid. Normally we’d have it off in eight hours but you’re still fighting traces of the bug. Might stage a comeback if we crank your metabolism too high.” 
    The bug.
    Luckett, screaming in agony. A lawn littered with twisted bodies. A disease so merciless, so fast that it didn’t even wait for its victims to die before throwing them into rigor mortis. 
    Brüks closed his eyes. “How many?”
    “What—”
    “Did we leave behind.”
    “You know, Dan, I wouldn’t write those guys off. I know how bad it looked, but if I’ve learned anything, it’s that you don’t second-guess the Bicams. They’re always ten steps ahead, and they’ve always got plans within plans.”
    He waited until the voice beyond his eyelids finished talking. Then he asked again.
    It didn’t answer at first. Then: “Forty-four.”
    “Ten steps ahead,” he repeated in his own personal darkness. “You believe that.”
    “I do,” the voice said solemnly.
    “They expected forty-four deaths. They planned it. They wanted it.”
    “They didn’t want—”
    “And when they brought that—that monster along for the ride, they knew exactly what they were doing. They have it all under control.”
    “Yes. They do.” There wasn’t the slightest hint of doubt in the voice.
    Brüks took a breath, let it out again, reflected on the faint unexpected scent of growing things at the back of his throat.
    “I get the sense that faith doesn’t come easily to you,” the voice said gently after a few moments. “But sometimes things are just, you know. God’s will.”
    He opened his eyes. Lianna stared at him, kind and gentle and utterly delusional.
    “Please don’t say that,” Brüks said.
    “Why not?” She seemed genuinely puzzled.
    “Because you can’t possibly believe—because it’s a fairy tale, and it’s been used to excuse way too much...”
    “It’s not a fairy tale, Dan. I believe in a creative force beyond the physical realm. I believe it gave rise to all life. You can’t blame it for all the horrible shit that’s been done in its name.”
    Faint tingling in his fingers. A tide of saliva rising at the back of his throat. His tongue seemed to swell in his mouth.
    “Could you—I’d like to be alone, if you don’t mind,” he said softly.
    Lianna blinked. “Uh...sure, I guess. You can ditch the mesh any time. I brought you a fresh jumpsuit, it’s over there on the pad. ConSensus is hooked in to the paint job if you need anything, just tap three times. The interface is pretty—”
    I’m going to throw up, he thought. “Please,” he managed. “Just go.” And closed his eyes again, and clenched his teeth, and choked back the rising nausea until the sounds of her retreat faded away and all he could hear were the voices of machines and the roaring in his head.
    He did not throw up. He drew his legs to his chest, and wrapped his arms around them, and held them tight against the sudden uncontrollable shaking of his body. He kept his eyes clenched against the new world, against this microcosmic prison into which he’d awakened: infested by freaks and hungry predators, an insignificant bubble spinning farther from home with each passing second. Earth was only a memory now, lost and receding in an infinite void; and yet Earth was right here in his head, inescapable, a desert garden strewn with twisted corpses.
    Every one had Luckett’s face.
    
     <tepi>We learn geology the morning after the earthquake.
<teps>—Ralph Waldo Emerson
    
    Eventually the panic receded. Eventually he had to come back.
    He wasn’t sure how long he floated there. For the present he was content to take refuge in the darkness behind his own eyelids, in the hiss of ventilators and the soft beeping voices of medical monitors. Some kind of alarm chimed in the middle distance; it sounded five times and fell silent. A moment later the world lurched to the right and gentle pressure began to build against his shoulder blades, against his calves and heels. Up and down returned.
    Brüks opened his eyes. The view hadn’t changed. 
    He sat up, turned, let this new gravity drop his legs over the side of the pallet (his vitals vanished from the bulkhead as he rose). He fought off a threat of dizziness from his inner ears, held his hand out in front of him, watched until it stopped shaking.
    The exoskeleton vibrated ecstatically as he peeled it away, each strip snapping back to some elastic minimum as he set it free. They took body hair and skin cells with them, left denuded strips along his body. He left it trembling on the deck, a tangled ball of rubbery ligaments that shivered and twitched as if alive.
    He found his way to a lav that peeked around a small mountain of in-flight luggage, raided the bulkhead food fabber on the way back. Sucking a squeezebulb full of electrolytes he peeled fresh folded clothing from the wall where Lianna had left it: a forest-green jumpsuit, preemptively custom-fabbed by some onboard printer. He wobbled precariously while pulling on the pants, but the pseudograv was weak and forgiving. Finally he was finished: clothed, upright, his batteries beginning to soak up charge from the nutrients in his gut. He folded the pallet back into its alcove. Its smart-painted underside bulged subtly from the wall, softly luminescent.
    Tap three times, she’d said.
    ConSensus bloomed at his touch, an impoverished interface for the augmentally impaired: Systems, Comm, Library. A little v3-D Crown of Thorns hovered to one side in an imaginary void. All waited to dance at his fingertips, but he took VOCAL INTERFACE AVAILABLE at its word and said, “Ship layout.”
    The animation expanded smoothly into center stage, bristling with annotations. Engines and reactors and shielding swallowed at least three-quarters of the display: thrust cones, fusion reactors, the rippling toroidal contours of great rad-blocking magnetic fields. Shock absorbers and antiproton traps and great protective slabs of lithium hydride. Brüks had seen the tech thumbnailed for short attention spans on any number of popsci feeds. Antimatter microfusion, they called it. A nuclear pulse drive turbocharged with a judicious sprinkling of antiprotons. Give it a decent launch window and the Crown of Thorns could make it to Mars in a couple of weeks.
    “What’s our heading?” he asked aloud. NAV UNAVAILABLE, ConSensus replied.
    “What’s our location?” NAV UNAVAILABLE.
    “What’s our destination, then?”
    NAV UNAVAILABLE.
    Huh.
    The Crown’s habitable reaches lay along a spine one hundred fifty meters long, a tube of alloy and atmosphere connecting bits of superstructure like beads on a nail. The Hub Valerie had dragged him through was two-thirds of the way from drive to prow. Its spokes were back in motion, sweeping through space in majestic counterpoint to the flywheel farther up. (Only the Hub’s aft hemisphere rotated, Brüks noticed. The other—COMMAND according to ConSensus, as if any modern space vessel required anything as quaint as a bridge in physical space—seemed fixed to the spine.)
    “Focus habitat.”
    The Crown redrew herself from the inside, engines and shielding neatly excised, nothing left but the hollows of the Crown’s forward section turning bright and front and center. Annotated constellations twinkled in those spaces like fireflies in a luminous gut. A cluster of gray icons glowed aft in the HOLD (enormous now, in the absence of its substrate): CHODOROWSKA, K.; EULALI, S.; OFOEGBU, C. Eight or nine others. MOORE, J.—green—glowed in the hab called DORM. LUTTERODT, L. was in the Hub, next to SENGUPTA, R. The hab containing BRÜKS, D. showed up as MED/MAINTENANCE, no matter what the sign on the hatch said; GALLEY/COMMONS occupied the hab immediately clockwise, LAB the one counter. STORES/TRIM, where he’d suffered his rude awakening, balanced out the wheel. Evidently it had already been reattached; but yellow neon highlighted distal injuries where the spoke was still under repair. 
    The last hab didn’t come with a label. Six stars shone there, though: five gray, one green. Only the green carried an ID, and it didn’t follow the usual format.
    VALERIE, was all it said.
    Fifty meters farther forward—past the Hub, past some kind of attic full of plumbing and circuitry and airlocks, way up past the main sensor array at the very front of the ship—ConSensus had drawn a hemispherical nose assembly and called it PARASOL. It appeared to be packed away for the time being but a translucent overlay showed it unfurled, a great flattened cone wide enough for the whole ship to hide behind. Brüks had no idea what it was. Space-dust deflector, maybe. Heat radiator. Magic Bicameral Cloak of Invisibility.
    “Root.” The Crown dwindled on the wall, slipped back into line with the other thumbnails.
    A Quinternet icon! He tore it open like a Christmas present. He didn’t have access to his preferences but even the Noosphere’s generic headlines were like water in the desert: ANARRES SECEDES, FFE KILLS VENTER, PAKISTAN’S ZOMBIE PREZ—
    Just a cache, of course. A stale-dated abstract small enough to fit into the Crown’s memory—unless someone was breaking silent-running protocols dating all the way back to Firefall, or tightbeaming updates directly to the Crown. Anything was possible.
    Probably a cache, though. In which case all he had to do was sort the available content by posting date, and—
    Twenty-eight days. Assuming they’d grabbed the cache on their way out the door, he’d been stashed in the basement for almost a month.
    He snorted softly and shook his head, vaguely surprised at his own lack of surprise. I’m growing immune to revelation.
    Still. Stale rations were better than none. And it wasn’t as though he had anyplace else to be.
    The president of Pakistan had finally, to no one’s great surprise, been unmasked as an avatar: the original had succumbed to viral zombieism almost a year before, almost certainly an assassination although no one was claiming responsibility. Venter Biomorphics—the last of the old-time corporations—had finally lost the fight against entropy and been swept away. A few proximists pointed their fingers at China’s agricultural collapse (that nation was still nose-diving three years after Venter’s artificial pollinators had crashed), but smart money blamed the incandescent hand of Forest Fire Economics. Something called jitterbug—some kind of weaponized mirror-neuron thing that hijacked its victims’ motor-control circuits—was doing the rounds in Latin America. And way out at L-5 (way in, Brüks corrected himself; way back), the Anarres colony had bolted a row of antique VASIM-R engines onto their belly and were preparing to take secession to new heights.
    ConSensus chimed. “Roaches to the Hub,” the wall barked in its wake. A female voice, strangely familiar although Brüks couldn’t put his finger on it. He returned to the cache, searched for references to a disturbance in the Oregon desert.
    Nothing.
    No mention of a mysterious nighttime skirmish on the Prineville Reserve: no zombie assault on religious fortifications, no counterattacking tornadoes impossibly slaved to human commands. No reports of armed forces keeping low to the ground, bivouacked around some cultist bull’s-eye on the desert plain.
    Odd.
    Maybe their final hurried exodus from that arena never made it into the cache. Brüks had been unconscious at the time but he imagined the Crown might not have lingered in orbit long enough to refresh its memory with newborn updates. Still. Valerie’s assault, the armistice, the quarantine—at least thirty solid hours of activity that should have pushed the needle about ten standard deevs above background. Even if there’d been no eyes on Prineville that night, someone would have noticed the sudden redeployment of personnel from previous assignments. Even if Valerie had blinded all those skeyes up in geosynch, the disappearance of her hijacked carousel from its garage would have registered somewhere.
    The world had too many windows. Every house was glass. It had been decades since any single entity—corporate, political, or synthetic—had been able to draw the blinds on all of them.
    Maybe someone had just scrubbed the onboard cache. The same someone who had apparently locked him out of you-are-here.
    Because this is all about you. Keeping you in the dark is everyone’s top priority.
    He winced.
    “Roaches to the Hub. You think we’ve got nothing better to do than watch you fondle your dick?”
    Brüks blinked, looked around. “What?”
    “Uh, she means you, Dan,” Lianna said invisibly. “Kind of a briefing. Thought you might like to know what’s going on.”
    “Oh. I—” 
    Roaches? 
    “—I’ll be right there.”
    The ladder stretched through the center of the compartment like a strand of DNA stretched straight. Brüks leaned across the hatch from which it emerged—still a bit wobbly in the spin—grabbed its rails and peered into the basement. Stacked crates down there, lengths of dismembered plumbing. He craned his neck; overhead, the ladder rose into pale blue light.
    The only way out was up. He took a breath and raised his foot.
    
    <#>
    
    The ladder left him at the bottom of the spoke, on a circular ledge framing the hatch. Another ladder opposite stretched up into the distance like an exercise in perspective geometry. He had not been hallucinating before: its rungs were easily a meter apart, unclimbable in Earth gravity. An easy enough reach here, though, under half that pull.
    Not that it mattered. The ladder was only a fallback. The conveyer belt descended smoothly into its burrow to his left, passed around some hidden wheel beneath his feet, rose again toward the Hub. Its stirrup-handholds swept past at two-meter intervals, thoughtfully spaced for a foot and a hand. Going up; going down. 
    Going up.
    Even under power the ascent seemed light-years long, an infinite regression of rungs and rings and bulkheads that almost seemed to breathe when he wasn’t looking. The belt drew him up through a series of telescoping segments; hazard striping highlighted the spots where each handed off to the next, where the bore of the tunnel increased by some fractional increment. Little readouts, logarithmically spaced along the bulkhead, pegged the gravity—0.3, 0.25, 0.2— as he rose. 
    Halfway up, the panic returned.
    He had a few seconds’ warning: a sudden formless disquiet spreading through the gut, an anxiety that his civilized neocortex tried to write off as simple acrophobia. In the next instant it metastasized into a bone-chilling terror that froze him solid. Suddenly his breathing was fast as a hummingbird’s heartbeat; suddenly his fingers were clenched tight as old roots around a rock.
    He waited, paralyzed, for some nameless horror to rise in his sight and tear him limb from limb. Nothing did. He forced himself to move. His head turned like a rusted valve, creaked left, right; his eyes rolled frantically in search of threats.
    Nothing. An intersegmental gasket passed around him. The rungs of the ladder ticked unremarkably by. Something flickered at the corner of—but no. Nothing there.
    Nothing at all.
    Over endless seconds time resumed its normal flow; the panic slouched back to the bottom of his brain. Brüks looked back down the way he’d come. His stomach stirred uneasily, but he saw nothing to provoke the slightest unease. 
    Down had disappeared by the time he reached top; Coriolis, pulling him gently sideways, persisted a few moments longer. He emerged near the bottom of the southern hemisphere, from one of the six teardrop protuberances ringing the south pole. The tunnel he’d glimpsed there before was sealed now, a waist-high railing around its perimeter, a great foil hatch squeezed tight as a sphincter across its mouth. An iris with no pupil. Its fish-eye reflection turned the mirrorball opposite into a blind chrome eyeball.
     He turned to face the grille bisecting the Hub: the rings of some mercurial Saturn, closed in a tight hug. Fragments, flickers of motion were visible through that rotating mesh (stationary mesh, he corrected himself: it was this lower hemisphere that turned): the bottoms of bare feet, a flash of yellow rendered in a fractured mosaic. An insect’s-eye view. 
    Soft voices filtered back through the grille. The yellow fragments moved like a school of fish. “Come on up.” 
    Moore’s voice.
    There were two routes forward, two circular openings in the grate on opposite sides of the mirrorball. One was blocked by a retracted spiral staircase squashed almost flat, a black metal pie chart cut into staggered slices: a vital thoroughfare when the engines burned, when acceleration turned forward into up. A useless bit of lawn sculpture now, pulled up and out of the way. 
    The other was clear, though. Brüks kicked off from the bulkhead, sailed through the air with a mix of exhilaration and mild terror, flailed as the opening rotated lazily past and left him grabbing at the grille a couple of meters antispinward. Chastened, he clambered sideways and through like a crab emerging from its burrow, floated into the northern hemisphere between mirrored earth and smart-painted sky. 
    Moore stood barefoot, toes curled into the grating, attention focused on a tacband wrapped around his forearm. Mimetic G-couches disfigured the northern half of the mirrorball like body-cast impressions pressed into cookie dough. They ranged radially around the temperate zone, their headrests converging toward the pole. Anyone installed in one of those couches would find themselves looking forward onto the Hub’s northern hemisphere: the dome of an indoor sky, a featureless wash of smart paint save for one spot where yet another redundant ladder stretched from the grille to a hatch just to one side of the north pole.
    A Hindian woman strapped into the mirrorball—late twenties perhaps, blunt dark bangs, nape shaved halfway to the crest of her skull—jerked her head away the moment Brüks tried to meet her eyes. Something seemed to catch her attention down by her right foot. “About fucking time.” She wore a chromaform vest over her orange jumpsuit (We’re color-coded, Brüks realized): infinitely programmable, but all it showed now was a translucent render of the very couch she was strapped into. It turned her into a pair of arms and a floating head grafted to a ghostly body.
    Lianna hovered off the grille on the far side of the compartment. She flashed a smile that broadcast welcome and apology in equal measure. “Dan Brüks, Rakshi Sengupta.”
    Brüks took another look around the dome; “Uh, Valerie...”
    “Won’t be joining us,” Lianna said.
    “Fixing her arm,” Sengupta added.
    Thank Christ.
    “So,” Moore began, clearly eager to cut to the chase now that the straggler had arrived. “What was it?”
    Sengupta rolled her eyes. “Whaddya think they burned through the felching spoke it was an attack.”
    Who, Brüks wondered, and held his tongue.
    “I was hoping for a bit more detail,” Moore said mildly, unfazed.
    Lianna obliged. “Basically they turned a magnifying glass on us. Focused microwave pulse, about half a gigawatt judging by the damage.” 
    “From where?” Moore asked.
    Lianna bit her lip. “Sun. Northern hemisphere.”
    “That’s it?”
    “Even Bicams have limits, Jim. It’s pure hindsight; differential heat stress on different facets of the structure, spoke trajectory—basically they just back-calced how the different parts were lined up at the time, figured a bearing from the angle of the hit.”
    “Coulda done that ourselves,” Sengupta grumbled.
    “Who?” Brüks blurted out. “Who hit us?”
    Nobody spoke. Sengupta regarded something in his general direction the way she might examine a bit of fecal matter scraped off her boot.
    “That’s what we’re trying to figure out,” Lianna said after a moment.
    Moore pursed his lips. “So the hive didn’t see it coming.”
    She shook her head, as if reluctant to admit to the shortcoming out loud.
    “Tran, then.”
    “It’d be one for the books if a baseline caught them with their pants down.”
    Moore’s eyes flickered to stern. “Under normal circumstances, certainly. They’re not exactly operating at a hundred percent.”
    Gray icons, clustered in the hold. “Uh—” Brüks cleared his throat. “What are they doing back there, exactly?”
    “Convalescing,” Lianna said. “Bug hit them a lot harder than it hit us. We’ve pumped up the pressure to speed their recovery, but it’ll still be days.”
    “So after the break,” Moore mused.
    Break?
    Lianna nodded. “We’ll have to boot up at least a week early on the other end. They want the option of going hands-on.”
    “Hands-on where?” Brüks wondered. “What bre—”
    Sengupta cut him off with an exasperated whistle through clenched teeth, turned to Lianna: “Didn’t I tell you?”
    “If you could hold on to your questions for the moment,” Moore suggested, “I’ll be happy to fill you in later.”
    “When you won’t be wasting everyone else’s time,” Sengupta added.
    “Rak,” Lianna began.
    “Why is he even here does anyone expect him to actually do anything other than feel included?”
    “Is that what I’m feeling,” Brüks remarked.
    “It’s not exactly Dan who’s wasting our time right now,” Lianna pointed out.
    Sengupta snorted.
    Moore waited a beat before getting back to business. “Are there any weapons that could do this from that range?”
    Lianna shrugged. “You’re the spook. You tell me.”
    “I’m not talking about baseline tech.”
    “This doesn’t look like a dedicated weapon. More likely someone hijacked a bunch of powersats to fire simultaneously at the same spot. Probably a one-shot deal, too; you don’t get that kind of output by staying inside the rated specs. Probably blew the circuits across the whole network, maybe even past their healing threshold.”
    “Wouldn’t matter anyway with a twelve-minute lag. They had one chance to anticipate our position and they blew it. Rakshi, are—”
    “Quarter-second thruster squirts random intervals between six and twelve minutes. You won’t even feel ’em but those fuckers won’t be forecasting me again.”
    Twelve-minute light speed lag, Brüks reflected. From the sun and back. So we’re six light-minutes from the sun, which puts us, puts us...
     One hundred eight million kilometers. Close as Venus, if he remembered his basic astronomy.
    “—impact our tipping point?” Moore was asking
    Lianna nodded. “But not enough to matter. They’re working through the revisions now. Another couple of hours, they say.”
    “And what about our tail?”
    Sengupta painted invisible strokes in the air. A window opened on the dome: some kind of plasma plot, three red spikes erupting from a landscape of violet foothills. The details wobbled in real time but those peaks stayed constant. Up in one corner arcane annotations nattered on about DISCRIMINANT COMPLEX and INFRARED OCCLUSION and MICROLENSING.
    Heatprints of some kind, Brüks guessed. Cloaked, judging from the annotations, but apparently Sengupta had magic fingers. 
    They were being followed. This just keeps getting better.
    “So.” Moore considered. “Two prongs or two players?” 
    “Prongs, probably. The Bicams think the shot was meant to disable us enough to let them catch up.” Lianna hmmed. “I wondered why they didn’t just throw a missile at us...”
    Sengupta: “Maybe they will now their big trip wire went kaput.”
    “We could use that,” Moore mused. “Rakshi, how much warning would we get if they fired on us?”
    “Fired what you want the whole catalog?”
    “Standard ass-cracker. Ballpark’s fine.”
    She wiggled her fingers, for all the world as if she were counting on them. “Seven hours eight minutes if the range doesn’t change. Give or take.”
    “Then we better get started,” Moore said.
    
    <#>
    
    “That is easily the most unenlightening briefing I have ever attended,” Brüks grumbled, pulling himself back into the southern hemisphere. “And given the number of departmental committees I sit on, that’s saying something.”
    “Yeah, I kind of got that.” Lianna looked back from a bulkhead handhold. “Come with me. Got something that might help.”
    She turned like a fish and sailed through the nearest spokeway. The very sight made Brüks a bit queasy. He followed at his own awkward pace, back through the cube-infested southern hemisphere, into the ball-and-socket that had swallowed her. Lianna dropped easily ahead of him, fending off Coriolis with a push and a kick; she was ten meters down the spoke before she even grabbed a hoop. Fuck those acrobatics: Brüks grabbed his own hoop right off the top, swung around and fumbled his foot into another before he weighed more than a couple of kilograms. He couldn’t be bothered to work out the acceleration of free-falling bodies that gained weight with each meter, but down the length of the spoke he was pretty sure they all ended in splat.
    Commons. Another hab identical to those he kept escaping: a two-level propane tank from his grandfather’s backyard barbecue, grown monstrous and pumped full of stale air. The upper level, at least, was less crowded than Repair and Maintenance: chairs, privacy screens, a half-dozen half-emptied cubes, a table. The usual bands of epiphytic astroturf. A framework of pencil-thin scaffolding extended from one wall. The facets of a personal tent—bone yellow, tough as tendons—stretched like latex between those vertices. A couple of sticky chairs faced each other amid the clutter.
    Lianna was over by the fabber, rummaging through a freshly popped cube. “Got it.”
    The cowl she held up looked a little like a bondage hood for plumbing fetishists, studded with washers and tiny screws that traced a fine grid across the skull. It left only the lower face exposed: mouth, jaw, the tip of the nose. Two especially prominent washers sat embedded over the eyes. 
    Ambient superconductors. Compressed-ultrasound pingers. A read-write voxel array in black leather.
    “My old gaming mask,” Lianna announced. “I thought you could use an interface a little more user-friendly than Rakshi tends to be.” 
    A gimp hood, for cripples confined to meatspace. 
    “I mean, since you don’t have the imp—”
    “Thanks,” Brüks said. “I think I’ll stick with the smart paint if it’s all the same to you.”
    “It’s not just for gaming,” Lianna assured him. “It’s perfectly transparent for ConSensus, and it’s way faster than going through the paint. Plus it’ll triple your assimilation rate over anything filtered through the senses. Perfect for porn. Whatever you like.” She closed the cube. “There’s really not much of anything it can’t do.”
    He took it from her. The material felt faintly oily in his hands. He turned it over, read the little logo that hovered a virtual centimeter off its surface: INTERLOPER ACCESSORIES.
    “It’s completely noninvasive,” Lianna told him. “All TMS and compressed ultrasound, even the opt—”
    “I’m familiar with the tech,” he told her. And then: “Thanks.”
    “And you know, if you ever are in the mood for gaming, I’m happy to buddy up.”
    No mention of his helplessness at Valerie’s hands. No mention of his panic attack. No impatience with his ignorance, no condescension over his lack of augments. Just an overture and a helping hand.
    Brüks tasted a mixture of shame and gratitude. I like this woman, he thought.
    “Thanks,” he said again, because he didn’t know anything else that fit.
    She flashed a goofy smile—“Any time,”—and pointed to something past his shoulder. “I think Jim wanted a word, right?”
    Brüks turned. Moore had dropped soundlessly onto the deck behind him. Now he stood there looking vaguely apologetic, the websack on his back bulging with curves and odd angles.
    “Should I—”
    “I gotta get back to the hold anyway. He’s all yours.” Lianna vanished into the ceiling with a jump and a grab while Moore shrugged the sack off his shoulders and split the seal. Brüks watched him withdraw a roll of the same kind of webbing.
    Moore held it out. “For humping gear.”
    Brüks took it after a moment—“Thanks. Don’t seem to have brought much gear with me,”—but the Colonel was already back in his rucksack. This time he extracted a long green bottle, turned it in his hands so Brüks could see the label: Glenmorangie.
    “Found it in one of the cubes,” he said. “Don’t ask me how it got there. Maybe it was some kind of retailer’s bonus for a big order. Maybe Chinedum just wanted to give me a doggie treat. All I know is, it’s a personal favorite—”
    He set it on the deck, reached back into the sack.
    “—and it came with a nice set of glasses.” 
    He gestured to the sticky chairs. “Pull up a seat.”
    
    <#>
    
    Moore cracked the bottle; the smell of peat and wood smoke swirled in the air. “Technically we shouldn’t be playing with open liquids even at one-third gee, but squeezebulbs make everything taste like plastic.”
    Brüks held out his glass.
    “If I had to guess”—Moore let a wobbling, low-gravity dram escape from the bottle— “I’d say you’re feeling a bit pissed off.” 
    “Maybe,” Brüks admitted. “When I’m not crapping my pants with existential terror.”
    “One day you’re minding your own business on your camping trip—”
    “Field research.”
    “—the next you’re in the crossfire of a Tran war, the day after that you wake up on a spaceship with a bull’s-eye painted on its hull.”
    “I do wonder what I’m doing here. Every thirty seconds or so.”
    They clinked and swallowed. Brüks grunted appreciatively as the liquid set the back of his throat to smoldering.
    “There’s a risk in being here, certainly,” Moore admitted. “And for that I apologize. On the other hand, if we hadn’t taken you with us you’d most likely be dead already.”
    “Do we even know who’s chasing us?”
    “Not with any certainty. Could be any number of parties. Even cavemen.” The Colonel sipped his drink. “Sometimes Lianna doesn’t give us enough credit.”
    “But why?” A thought occurred to him: “The hive didn’t steal this thing, did they?”
    Moore chuckled. “Do you know how many basic patents the Order has its name on? They could probably buy a fleet of these ships out of petty cash if they wanted to.”
    “Then why? ”
    “The hive was classified as a threat—rightly—even when it was stuck in a desert at the bottom of the well. Now we’re on a ship that can take us anywhere from Icarus to the O’Neils.” He regarded his scotch. “The threat level isn’t going anywhere but up.”
    “That where we’re going? Icarus?”
    Moore nodded. “I don’t think our tail knows that yet. For all they know we could be cutting across the innersys on our way somewhere else. Probably why they’ve held back as long as they have.” He drained his glass. “Why’s a sticky word, though. It’s not especially productive to think of them as agents with agendas. Better to think of them as—as very complex interacting systems, just doing what systems do. Whatever the reagents tell themselves to explain their role in the reaction, it’s not likely to have much to do with the actual chemistry.”
    Brüks looked at the other man with new eyes. “You some kind of Buddhist, Jim?”
    “A Buddhist soldier.” Moore smiled and refilled their glasses. “I like that.” 
    “Was Icarus part of—the magnifying glass?”
    “Not likely. Can’t rule it out, though. It’s in the confidence zone.”
    “So why are we going there?”
    “There’s that word again.” Moore set his glass down on the nearest cube. “Recon, basically.” 
    “Recon.”
    “The Bicamerals would think of it as more of a—a pilgrimage, I suppose.” His mouth tightened at one corner: a small lopsided grimace. “You remember the Theseus mission.” 
    It was too rhetorical for a question mark. “Of course.”
    “You know the fueling technology it used—uses.”
    Brüks shrugged. “Icarus cracks the antimatter, lasers out the quantum specs, Theseus stamps them onto its own stockpiles, boom. All the antiprotons you can eat.”
    “Close enough. What matters is that Icarus has been beaming fuel specs up to Theseus’s telematter drive for over a decade now. And lately there’s been some suggestion that something else has been coming down along the same beam.”
    “Wouldn’t you expect them to send back samples?”
    “Theseus’s fab channel went to a quarantine facility in LEO. I’m talking about the actual telematter stream.”
    “I didn’t know that was even possible,” Brüks said. 
    “Oh, it’s quite possible. It was part of the design, in fact; fuel up, data down. Of course, the state of the art’s still light-years away from being able to handle complex structure, the receiver’s for—very basic stuff. Individual particles, exotic matter, nonbaryonic even. Stuff that might take a lot of energy to build.”
    Brüks sipped and swallowed. “What the hell were you expecting to find out there?”
    “We had no idea.” Moore shrugged. “Something alien, obviously. And the cost of sticking a condenser on the sun side was negligible next to the mission as a whole. At the very least they could use it for semaphore if the main channel went down. So they stuck one in. In case it proved useful.”
    “Which I’m guessing it did,” Brüks said.
    Moore eyed the empty glass at his side, as if weighing the wisdom of having set it down. After a moment he reached for the bottle.
    “Here’s the thing,” he said, refilling his glass. “Theseus got—decoyed en route, did you know that? Did they ever make that public?”
    Brüks shook his head. “There was something about course corrections out past Jupiter, new and better data coming down the pike.”
    “I can never keep it straight anymore,” Moore growled. “What we’ve admitted, what we’ve massaged, what we’ve covered up completely. But yes. After Firefall we were all staring at the sky so hard our eyeballs bled. Found something beeping out in the Kuiper Belt—that much you know—sent a squad of high-gee probes to check it out. Sent Theseus afterward, soon as we could slap her together. But she never made it that far. The probes got there first, caught a glimpse of something buried in a comet just before it blew up. All that way to get suckered by a—a decoy, as far as anyone could tell. Glorified land mine with a squawk box bolted on top. So we went back to our radio maps and our star charts and we found an X-ray spike buried in the archives, years before Firefall and never repeated. IAU called it an instrument glitch at the time but now it’s all we’ve got to go on. Theseus is already fifteen AUs out and headed the wrong way but you know, that’s the great thing about an unlimited fuel supply. We feed her a new course and she spins around and heads into the Oort and she finds something out there, tiny brown dwarf it looks like. She goes in for a look, finds something in orbit, starts to send back details and pfsst—” 
    He splayed the fingers of his free hand, brought them together at the tips, spread them again as if blowing out a candle.
    “—gone.”
    “I didn’t know that,” Brüks said after a while.
    “I’d be worried if you did.”
    “I thought the mission was still en route. Nothing on any of the feeds about finding anything.” Brüks eyed his own glass. “So, what was it?”
    “We don’t know.”
    “But if they’d started sending—”
    “Multiple contacts. Thousands. There was some evidence they might have been seeding the dwarf’s atmosphere with prebiotic organics—some kind of superjovian terraforming project, perhaps—but if they ever followed that up we never heard about it.”
    “Jesus,” Brüks whispered.
    “Maybe something else in there, too,” Moore added, staring at the deck. Staring through it. Staring all the way out to the Oort itself. “Something—hidden. Nothing definitive.”
    He didn’t seem to be entirely in the room. Brüks softly cleared his throat. 
    Moore blinked and came back. “That’s all we know, really. The telemetry was noisy at best—that dwarf has one mother of a magnetic field, shouts over anything you try to send out. The Bicamerals have some amazing extraction algorithms, they were squeezing data out of clips I swore were nothing but static. But there are limits. Theseus went in and it was like, like watching a ship vanish into a fog bank. For all we know she could still be sending—they left a relay sat behind at least. It’s still active. As long as there’s hope, we’ll keep the feed going. But we’re not getting anything back from the ship itself. Can’t even get a signal through that soup.”
    “Except you’re getting a signal right now, you said. Coming in along—”
    “No.” Moore held up his hand. “If the system was operating normally we’d have seen it operating, and we didn’t. No handshaking protocols, no explicit transmissions, nobody from up there telling us they were sending something down here. None of the usual bells that are supposed to go off when a package arrives. At most we got a little hiccup that suggests that something might have started coming down, but the checksums didn’t pass muster so move along folks, nothing to see here. Mission Control didn’t even notice it. I didn’t notice it. Wasn’t until the Bicamerals helped me squeeze the archives through their born-again algorithms that I clued in, years after the fact.”
    “But if the stream isn’t even running its own protocols, how can it be—”
    “Ask them.” Moore jerked his chin toward a vague point beyond the bulkhead, some nexus of Bicameral insight. “I’m just along for the ride.”
    “So, something’s using our telematter stream,” Brüks said.
    “Or was, at least.”
    “And it’s not us.” 
    “And whatever it is, it’s gone to great lengths to stay off the ’scope.” 
    “What would it be sending?”
    “The Angels of the Asteroids.” Moore shrugged. “That’s what the Bicamerals are calling it, or at least that’s our closest approximation. Probably just their idea of an op code. But I don’t know if they really think anything’s down there. Maybe it’s just a glitch after all. Or some kind of long-distance hack that didn’t work out, and we can learn something about the hackers by studying their footprints.”
    “Suppose there is something down there, though,” Brüks said. “Something—physical.”
    Moore spread his hands. “Like what? A clandestine mist of dissociated atoms?”
    “I don’t know. Something that breaks the rules.”
    “Well,” Moore said, “in that case, I suppose...” 
    He took a breath.
    “It’s had a few years to settle in.”
    
    
     <tepi>Things fall apart.
     <teps>—William Butler Yeats
    
    They’d come up with this really great plan to keep their mysterious pursuers from blowing up the Crown: they were going to blow it up themselves first.
    They hadn’t asked Brüks for his input.
    Now he was back in Maintenance and Repair, taping himself up with another rubbery exoskeleton. It was easy enough to lay down the bands; all he had to do was follow the denuded template he’d stripped into existence less than two days before.
    Of course, by now there were no days left to while away. Judging by the chime that had just sounded, he only had about two minutes to burn.
    Two minutes to burn.
    Lianna dropped out of the ceiling. “Hey. Just so you know, Rak’s about ready to fold down the spokes. Didn’t want you falling over when the gravity shifted.”
    Yeah, always concerned about the roaches, Brüks reflected wryly. That sounds just like Rakshi Sengupta. 
    On cue, the bulkheads shivered. The hab trembled with the sudden faint roar of a distant ocean. A squeezebulb rolled a few centimeters along the cube where someone had left it. 
    Brüks swallowed. His knitting ankle itched maddeningly. He resisted the urge to scratch; it wouldn’t help anyway, not through the cast.
    “Nothing to worry about,” Lianna assured him. “Right-side up goes out of whack by a couple of degrees for a couple of minutes. Not even enough to spill your drink. If you were drinking.”
    He wished he was.
    Down edged out from between his feet like a lazy pendulum, came to rest half a meter off his centerline: the Crown’s hollow bones folding back along the spine like the ribs of a closing umbrella, the spin that threw them out slowing in a precise and delicate handoff to acceleration building from behind. All those thousands of tonnes in slow motion, all those vectors playing one against another, and Brüks could feel nothing but a brief polite disagreement between his inner ears. Even now, down was edging back to where it belonged.
    It really was pretty impressive, he decided. Still: “It’s not the burn that bothers me. It’s the coma afterward.”
    “You won’t even feel it.”
    “That’s what I mean. If I’m going to fall into the sun I’d at least like to be awake enough to jump into an escape pod if things go south.”
    “Then you’ve got nothing to worry about. No escape pods.” 
    The hab jumped a bit, to the solid omnipresent thud of great docking clamps snapping shut. The ’bulb on the table wobbled back and forth. The Crown of Thorns, tied down and rigged for sail.
    She tossed him his jumpsuit, pointed to the ceiling. “Shall we go?”
    No effortless sail through a tunnel of light, this time. No easing ascent from pseudograv into free fall. The Crown was on fire now, engines alight, habs flattened back against her flanks; there was no escape from mass-times-acceleration. Every rung ascended left him heavy as the last, each hoop of hazard tape left him with that much farther to fall.
    For some reason he couldn’t identify, that almost made it easier.
    They emerged into the Hub, into the bottom of a bowl: a place as gravity-bound now as any other on the ship. The great iris at the south pole was fixed and dilated. Needles of mercury drooled from the mirrorball above like strings of gluey saliva, descending through the open pupil. Freight elevator, apparently. To the hold, and maybe beyond: to cubbies and crawlspaces where circuits could be wrestled manually in the event of some catastrophic systems failure; to the colossal neutron-spewing engines themselves.
    Brüks edged forward and leaned over the railing. The depths of the Crown’s hollow spine receded like an optical illusion, like God’s own trachea. (Only a hundred meters, Brüks reminded himself. Only. A hundred meters.) Signs of activity down there: flickers of motion, the faint clank of metal on metal. Liquid mirror-ropes vibrating like bowstrings in response to whatever tugged at their ends.
    He jumped at a touch on his shoulder. Lianna held two lengths of silver cord in her hand; a stirrup had miraculously opened at the end of each, like hypertrophic needle’s eyes. She handed him one line, pointed her foot through the loop in the other. “Grab and jump,” she said, stepping lightly onto the guardrail.
    She dropped away in slow motion—under a quarter-gee burn they weighed even less than under spin—and picked up speed with distance. Brüks hooked his own foot, grabbed his line with one hand (like wrapping your fingers around glassy rubber) and followed her down. The filament stretched and thinned in his grip as he descended. He raised his eyes and thought he might have glimpsed tiny shock waves rippling out from the point at which this miracle cord extruded from the mirrorball’s surface; but speed and distance robbed him of a second look. 
    He dropped into pastel twilight, past biosteel struts and annular hoops and padded iridescent bulkheads. Conduit bundles lined the throat like vocal cords; silvery metal streams blurred in passing. The end of Lianna’s discarded line snapped past going the other way, recoiling back up the shaft like a frog’s tongue.
    Only a quarter gee. Still dead easy to break your neck at the bottom of a hundred meters. 
    But Brüks’s descent was slowing now, his miracle bungee cord stretching to its limits. Another great hatch yawned just below, flanked by grilles and service panels and a half-dozen spacesuit alcoves. An airlock puckered the bulkhead to one side like a secondary mouth, big enough to swallow two of him whole. It was the larger mouth that took him, though. The silver cord lowered him through like a mother putting her baby to bed, dropped him gently from light into darkness. It set him down on the floor of a great dim cavern where monsters and machinery loomed on all sides, and abandoned him there.
    
    <#>
    
    So this is strategy, Brüks mused. This is foresight, these are countermeasures. This is intellect so vast it won’t even fit into language.
    This is suicide.
    “Have faith,” Lianna had said drily as they’d climbed into their suits. “They know what they’re doing.” 
    The spacesuit wrapped around him like an asphyxiating parasite. His breath and his blood rasped loud in his helmet; the nozzle up his ass twitched like a feeding proboscis. He couldn’t feel the catheter in his urethra, which in a way was even worse; he had no way of knowing what it was doing in there.
    They know what they’re doing.
    They’d spent the past two hours in the hold, lurking among the dim tangled shadows of dismembered machine parts while the rest of the ship froze down above them: habs, labs, spines and Hub all pumped dry and opened to vacuum. Until a few hours ago this cavernous space had been the exclusive domain of the afflicted Bicamerals, an improvised hyperbaric chamber where enemy anaerobes withered in poisonous oxygen, where the hive could lick their wounds and incant whatever spells they used to assemble the pieces of the puzzle they were building. Now all that arcane protomachinery was stacked and stored and strapped high against the walls. The Bicamerals, their tissues still saturated under the weight of fifteen atmospheres, had retreated into glass sarcophagi: personal decompression chambers with arms and legs. They stood arrayed on the deck like the opposite of deep-sea divers from a bygone age, barely mobile. Valerie’s zombies moved silently among them, apparently charged with their care. Grubs tended by drones.
    Now the hold itself was freezing down, the Crown’s last pocket of atmosphere thinning around the assembled personnel. Bicamerals, baselines, monsters—those interstitial, indeterminate things who might be a little of each—they all stood watching as the flaccid pile of fabric in the center of the chamber unfolded into a great black sphere, some interlocking geodesic frame pushing out from under its skin like an extending origami skeleton. The hatching of a shadow. 
    Moore had called it a thermos. Watching it inflate, Brüks was almost certain it was the same giant soccer ball that had carried them from the desert. New paint job, though. 
    Lianna bumped him from the side, touched helmets for a private word: “Welcome to the Prineville class reunion.” Brüks managed a smile in return.
    They know what they’re doing.
    Brüks did, too, after a fashion. They were going to fall sideways. They were going to tumble past the exhaust, almost close enough to reach out and see your own arm vaporizing in a torrent of plasma blasting past at twenty-five kilometers per second. No option to fire maneuvering thrusters for a bit of extra forward momentum, no chance of putting a little distance between this soon-to-be-broken spine and the rapture of a half-dozen fusion bombs per minute. Newton’s First was a real bitch, not open to negotiation. Not even the Bicamerals could get her to spread her legs more than a crack, and even that grudging concession would be barely enough to mask the loss of their front end. There would be nothing left over for safe-distancing maneuvers.
    And of course, if they didn’t miscalculate by a micron or two—if this little sprig of struts and scaffolding didn’t just get sucked into the wake and shredded to ions—well, maybe the barrage of neutrons sleeting out in all directions might be able to find a way in.
    Rakshi Sengupta reached up and popped the thermos’s hatch. It sprang open and bumped back against the curve of the sphere, pneumatic and bouncy. Sengupta climbed up and in. Valerie’s automatons—even more interchangeable now, thanks to limited wardrobe options in the survival-gear department—formed a line and began passing the Bicamerals into that globe like worker ants carrying endangered eggs to safety.
    All aboard, Lianna mouthed from behind her faceplate.
    It wasn’t just the radiance of the drive that would give them away. Even the heatprint of minimal life support would shine like a beacon against a cosmic background that barely edged above absolute zero. There were ways around that, of course. You don’t notice a candle held up against the sun, and the Crown of Thorns had been keeping itself line of sight between Sol’s edge and any pursuing telescopes: close enough to bury her heatprint in solar glare, not so close that she’d show up the moment someone threw an occlusion filter in front of their scanner. Another approach was to keep any warm bodies nested inside so much insulation that they’d be outside any reasonable search radius by the time their heatprint made it to the surface.
    The Bicamerals didn’t like to take chances. They were doing both.
    
    <#>
    
    It was the same soccer ball all right.
    Same webbing inside. Same ambience—Victorian Whorehouse Red, he thought with a grimace—shadows and wavelengths long enough to make even a corpse look pretty. Same company, with edits.
    A clutch of umbilicals hung from an overhead plexus and spread throughout the webbing. Brüks grabbed the nearest and locked it into his helmet’s octopus socket. Lianna reached down from overhead, double-checked the connection, gave him a thumbs-up. Brüks sacc’ed comm and whispered a thank-you over the chorus of quiet breathing that flooded his helmet. Lianna smiled back behind tinted glass.
    Moore climbed into the womb and sealed the hatch as the longwave dimmed around them. By the last of the light Brüks saw the soldier reach for his own umbilical. Then darkness swallowed them all.
    Valerie was in here, too, hidden inside one of these mercurial disguises. Brüks hadn’t seen her enter—hadn’t even seen her on the deck—but then again, she could do that. She had to be in here somewhere, maybe in that suit, or that one over there.
    He eyed the countdown on his HUD: two minutes, now. One fifty-nine.
    He yawned.
    They’d told him it would be easier this time. No seat-of-the-pants improvising, no panic-inducing suffocation. Just a breeze of fresh, cool anesthetic gas wafting through the helmet reg, putting him gently to sleep before the H2S strangled his very cells from the inside.
    They know what they’re doing. 
    Fifty-five seconds.
    An icon winked into existence next to the countdown: external camera booting up. Brüks blinked at it and—
    “Let there be light,” Lianna whispered over the channel, and there was light: a blinding yellow sun, the size of Brüks’s fist held at arm’s length, blazing in a black sky. Brüks squinted up against the glare: a jagged sunlit tangle of beams and parallelograms hung overhead, sliced along a dozen angles by sharp-edged fissures of shadow.
    Let there be a little less light, he amended, dialing back the brightness. The sun dimmed; the stars came out. They filled the void on all sides, a million bright motes that only managed to accentuate the infinite blackness between them. They disappeared directly overhead, eclipsed where the habs and girders of the Crown loomed like a junkyard in the sky. The sun turned the ship’s lit edges into a bright jigsaw; the rest was visible only by inference, a haphazard geometry of negative space against the stars. 
    The sky lurched.
    Here we go…
    Another lurch. A sense of slow momentum, building. Somewhere behind them, the ligaments that held the Crown together were burning through. Up ahead, the view listed to port.
    They know what they’re doing.
    The bow of the ship began to topple, slow and majestic as a falling redwood. Sunlight and shadow played across its facets, hiding and highlighting myriad angles as the stars arced past. The universe turned around them. The sun rose, reached zenith, fell.
    Something glowed to stern, a corona peeking around a great black shape that blocked out the stars to stern: something finally tilting into view as a dozen insignificant rags of metal snapped and fell away. Brüks caught the briefest glimpse of dark mass, massive slabs of shielding, a great corrugated trunk thick as a skyscraper—
    (Shock absorbers, he realized.)
    —before a tsunami of white light struck him instantly, rapturously blind.
    Floaters swarmed through his eyeballs like schools of panicked fish. Brüks blinked away tears, reflexively reached up, felt that strange, newly familiar inertia return to his arms—
    —Free fall— 
    —before the sticky mesh released them to let his gloved hands swipe clumsily at his faceplate. He missed; his arms flailed, encountering nothing but the elastic bounce of the gee-web.
    He wobbled gently, weightless, waiting for his vision to clear. By the time he could see again the panorama had been usurped by mere telemetry: an impoverished wraparound of numbers and contour plots and parabolic trajectories. Brüks squinted, tried to squeeze signal from noise through the cotton growing in his head: the Crown’s drive section was already kilometers to port and kilometers ahead, its lead increasing with each second per second. Tactical had laid a vast attenuate cone of light across the space before it, spreading from the abandoned drive like a searchlight. Ramscoop, Brüks realized after a second. A magnetic field to gather up ionized particles, a brake against the solar wind. A proxy for mass gone suddenly missing: no telltale change in acceleration, no suspicious easing back on the throttle. One measure among many, shoehorned in between the masking of heatprints and whatever stealthed this ship to radar. Moore had told him as much as he could understand, Brüks supposed. There would be more. Solutions to problems no baseline could even foresee, let alone solve. A careful clandestine exit stage left, while unwitting pursuers followed a bright burning decoy toward the land of the comets. All spread out across the curve of his own personal diving bell, numbers and diagrams and stick-figure animations for the retarded.
    He only understood half of it, and didn’t know if he could trust the other half.
    Maybe it’s not even real, he thought drowsily. Maybe it’s all just a comforting fantasy to keep me pacified in the back seat. Mommy and Daddy, telling nice stories to keep the children from crying.
    They were still alive, at least. The exhaust hadn’t vaporized them outright. Only time would tell if radiation sickness might. Time, or—
    He cast his eyes around the bubble of intel. He saw nothing that spoke obviously to the subject of gamma rays.
    It would take a while, of course. You wouldn’t feel anything at first, certainly not in the few minutes left before everyone went down for the…night… 
    Fifty days to Icarus. Fifty days tumbling ass-over-entrails, powered down, ballistic, just another piece of inner system junk. Needle in a haystack, maybe, but nowhere near sharp enough to prick anyone who happens to look this way. Lots of time for those bright little shards to rot us out from the inside. We could die in our sleep and never know it.
    His eyelids felt incongruously heavy in the weightless compartment. He kept them open, peered around at all those faces under glass, looked for smiles or frowns or any telltale wrinkles of worry that might be creasing more-enlightened foreheads. Angles and optics turned half the helmets into warped mirrors, hiding the faces within. Some tiny part of Daniel Brüks furrowed its brow in confusion—Wait a minute…aren’t the lights supposed to be off?—but somehow he could see Lianna, eyes already closed, her face smoothed either in sleep or resignation. He could see the back of Moore’s helmet, down past his own boots. He was almost certain that he could make out a pair of Bicameral eyes here and there, all closed, the mouths beneath moving in some silent synchronized chant. 
    Nothing but breathing on comm.
    Maybe I’m asleep already, he thought, twisting in the web. Maybe I’m lucid.
    Valerie stared back at him. No trace of fatigue or anesthesia in that face.
    No metabolic hacks for her, Brüks thought as his eyes began to close. No rotten stench in the back of her throat, no CO or H2S clogging up her blood cells, no half-assed technology to keep her under. She doesn’t need our help. She was doing this twenty thousand years ago, she’d mastered the undead arts before we’d even started scratching stick figures on cave walls. She gorged on us and then she just went away while we bred back to sustainable levels, while we forgot she was real, while we turned her from predator to myth, myth to bedtime story…
    A bullet hole appeared in the center of her breastplate. A line, growing vertically: a crack splitting her suit down the middle.
     All those years we took to convince ourselves she didn’t really exist after all, and all that time she was sleeping right under our feet. Right up until the time she got hungry again, and dug herself out of the dirt like some monstrous godforsaken cicada, and went hunting while we put ourselves to sleep in our own graves and called it Heaven…
    Valerie twisted and squirmed and emerged naked from her silvery cocoon: white as a grub, lean as a mantis. She grinned needles and clambered across the web toward him.
    Like we’re sleeping now, Brüks thought, fading. While she smiles at me.
     <tepi>I am large, I contain multitudes.
     <teps>—Walt Whitman
     
    
    He descended into Heaven’s dungeon, but the shackles were empty and his wife was nowhere to be seen.
    He lay on his back in the desert, looked down and saw that he’d been gutted, crotch to throat. Spectral snakes surged eagerly from the gash, fled the confines of his body for the endless baked mud of a fossil seabed, free at last, free at last...
    He soared through an ocean of stars, dimensionless pinpoints: abstract, unchanging, unreal. One of them broke the rules as he watched, a pixel unfolding into higher dimensions like some quantum flower blooming in time-lapse. Angles emerged from outlines; shadows stretched across surfaces turning on some axis Brüks couldn’t quite make out. Bones spun majestically at its midsection.
    Monsters in there, waiting for him.
    He tried to veer off, to brake. He pulled all those temporoparietal strings that turned dreams lucid. The Crown of Thorns continued to swell in his sights, serenely untroubled by his pitiful attempts to rewrite the script. A hab swept toward him like the head of a mace; he flailed and thrashed and closed his eyes but felt no impact. When he looked again he was inside, and Valerie was staring back. 
    Welcome to Heaven, Cold Cut.
    Her monster eyes were fully dilated; like headlights, like balls of bright bloody glass lit from within. The mouth beneath split open like a fresh grinning wound.
    Go back to sleep, she told him. Forget all your worries. Sleep forever.
    Her voice was suddenly, strangely androgynous.
    It’s your call.
    He cried out—
    
    <#>
    
    —and opened his eyes.
    Lianna leaned over him. Brüks raised his head, glanced frantically in all directions.
    Nothing. No one but Lianna. They were back in Repair and Maintenance.
    Better than Storage.
    He settled back on the pallet. “I guess we made it?”
    “Probably.”
    “Probably?” His throat was parched.
    She handed him a squeezebulb. “We’re where we’re supposed to be,” she said as he sucked like a starving newborn. “No obvious signs of pursuit. It’ll take a while before we can be sure but it’s looking good. The drive blew up a few hours after we separated, so as far as we know they know, they got us.”
    “Whoever they are.”
    “Whoever they were.”
    “So. Next stop, Icarus?” 
    “Depends on you.”
    Brüks raised his eyebrows.
    “I mean yes, we’re going to Icarus. But you don’t have to be up for it if you’re not, you know, up for it. We could put you back under, next thing you know you’re back on Earth safe and sound. Since you’re not officially part of the expedition.”
    One mission-critical. One ballast.
    “Or you put me back under and I die in my sleep when your expedition goes pear-shaped,” he said after a moment.
    She didn’t deny it. “You can die in your sleep anywhere. Besides, the Bicams would know better than any of us, and they’re pretty sure you’ll make it back.”
    “They told you that, did they?”
    “Not explicitly, but—yeah. I got that sense from them.”
    “If they really knew what they were going to find down there,” Brüks mused, “they wouldn’t have to go in the first place.”
    “There is that,” she said. And then, more cheerfully: “But if the mission does go pear-shaped, wouldn’t you rather die in your sleep than be wide awake and screaming when you get sucked into space?”
    “You are the Queen of the Silver Lining,” Brüks told her.
    She bowed, and waited.
    A trip to the sun. A chance to glimpse the traces of an alien intelligence—whatever alien meant in a world where members of his own species stitched themselves together into colony minds, or summoned their own worst nightmares back from the Pleistocene to run the stock market. The face of the unknown. What scientist would choose to sleep through that?
    As if they’d ever let you get close to their precious Angel of the Asteroids, his inner companion sneered. As if you’d be able to make any sense of it if they did. Better to sit it out, better to let them carry you back home so you can pick up your life where you dropped it. You don’t belong out here anyway. You’re a roach on a battlefield.
    Who could easily get squashed in his sleep. What soldier in combat, no matter how benign, ever gave a thought to the vermin underfoot?
    Awake, at least, he might be able to scuttle clear of descending boots.
    “You think I’d pass up the chance to do this kind of field work?” he said at last.
    Lianna grinned. “Okay then. You know the drill, I’ll let you get yourself together.” She took a bouncing step toward the ladder.
    “Valerie,” Brüks blurted out behind her.
    She didn’t turn. “In her hab. With her entourage.”
    “When the ship was breaking—I saw—”
    She tilted her head, lowered her gaze to some point on the far bulkhead. “You see weird things when you go under, sometimes. Near-death experiences, you know?”
    Too near. “This was no Tunnel of Light.”
    “Hardly ever is.” Lianna reached for the railing. “Brain plays tricks when you turn it on and off. Can’t trust your own perceptions.”
    She paused and turned, one hand on the ladder.
    “Then again, when can you?”
    
    <#>
    
    Moore dropped unsmiling onto the deck as Brüks finished pulling on his jumpsuit. He held a personal tent in one hand, a rolled-up cylinder the size of his forearm. “I hear you’ll be joining us.”
    “Try to control your enthusiasm.”
    “You’re an extra variable,” the Colonel told him. “I have a great deal of work to do. And we may not have the luxury of keeping an eye on you if things get sticky. On the other hand—” He shrugged. “I can’t imagine deciding any differently, in your shoes.”
    Brüks raised his left foot, balanced on his right to scratch at his freshly pinkened ankle (someone had removed the cast during his latest coma). “Believe me, getting in the way’s the last thing I want to do, but this isn’t exactly familiar territory for me. I don’t really know the rules.”
    “Just—stay out of the way, basically.” He tossed the tent to Brüks. “You can set up your rack pretty much anywhere you want. The habs are a bit messy—we had to relocate a lot of inventory when they converted the hold—but we’ve also got fewer people living in them for the time being. So find a spot, set up your tent, buckle down. If you need something and the interface can’t help you, ask Lianna. Or me, if I’m not too busy. The Bicamerals will be coming out of decompression in a few days; try to keep out from underfoot.  Needless to say that goes double for the vampire.”
    “What if the vampire wants me underfoot?”
    Moore shook his head. “That’s not likely.”
    “She already went out of her way to—to provoke me...”
    “How, exactly?”
    “You see her arm, after the spoke broke?”
    “I did not.”
    “She broke it. She broke her own fucking arm. Repeatedly. Said I wasn’t setting it right.”
    “But she didn’t attack you. Or threaten you.”
    “Not physically. She really seemed to get off on scaring the shit out of me, though.”
    The Colonel grunted. “In my experience, those things don’t have to try to scare the shit out of anyone. If she wanted you dead or broken, you would be. Vampires have—idiomatic speech patterns. You may have simply misunderstood her.”
    “She called me a cold cut.”
    “And Rakshi Sengupta called you a roach. Unless I miss my guess you took that as an insult too.”
    “Wasn’t it?”
    “Common Tran term. Means so primitive you’re unkillable.”
    “I’m plenty killable,” Brüks said.
    “Sure, if someone drops a piano on your head. But you’re also field-tested. We’ve had millions of years to get things right; some of those folks in the Hold are packing augments that didn’t even exist a few months ago. First releases can be buggy, and it takes time for the bugs to shake out—and by then, there’s probably another upgrade they can’t afford to pass up if they want to stay current. So they suffer—glitches, sometimes. If anything, roach connotes a bit of envy.”
    Brüks digested that. “Well, if it was supposed to be some kind of compliment, her delivery needs work. You’d think someone with all that brainpower would be able to cobble together a few social skills.”
     “Funny thing”—Moore’s voice was expressionless—“Sengupta couldn’t figure out how someone with all your interpersonal skills could be so shitty at math.”
    Brüks said nothing.
    “Don’t take this personally,” the Colonel told him, “but try to keep in mind that we’re guests on this ship and your personal standards—whatever they might be—do not reign supreme here. Dogs are always going to come up short if you insist on defining them as a weird kind of cat. These people are not baselines with a tweak here and there. They’re closer to, to separate cognitive subspecies. As far as Valerie goes, she and her—bodyguards—have pretty much stayed in their hab since the trip began. I expect that to continue. She finds the ambient lighting too bright, for one thing. I doubt you’ll have trouble as long as you don’t go looking for any.”
    Brüks felt his mouth tighten at the corners. “So”—remembering the briefing in the Hub, in the company of the envious Rakshi Sengupta— “a week to Icarus?” 
    “Closer to twelve days,” Moore told him.
    “Why so long?”
    Moore looked grim. “That fiasco at the monastery. The Crown had to launch prematurely. The sep maneuver was always part of the plan—doesn’t take a hive to know a trip like this is going to draw attention—but the replacement drive’s still in pieces. They’re putting it together as we speak.”
    Brüks blinked. “We’ve got no engines at all?” 
    “Maneuvering thrusters. Can’t use them yet, not without risking detection.” Moore saw the look on Brüks’s face, added: “Not that I expect we’ll need them in any event. The hive’s ballistic calculations are very accurate. And it’s just as well we’re taking the long way, given the medical situation. The bug was easy enough to fix once they nailed down its specs, but healing takes time and hibernation’s not the same thing as a medical coma. Last thing we want is to hit the zone with our core personnel compromised.” Moore’s face hardened at some grim insight, relaxed again. “My advice? Look on this as an extended sabbatical. Maybe you get a ringside seat to some amazing discoveries; maybe it’s a dead end and you’ll be bored out of your skull. Either way, you can weigh it against a painful death in the Oregon desert and call it a win on points.”  He spread his hands. “Here endeth the lesson.”
    
    <#>

    The lights had been dimmed in the northern hemisphere. Climbing into the Hub Brüks could see a wash of arcane tacticals through the equatorial grille, a chromatic mishmash he knew would make no sense even with an unobstructed view.
    “Wrong way,” said a familiar voice as he headed for the next spoke.
    Sengupta.
    “What?” He couldn’t see her, even through the grille; the mirrorball eclipsed the view. But her voice carried clearly around the chamber: “You visiting the vampire?”
    “Uh, no.” God no.
    “Then you’re going the wrong way.”
    “Thanks.” He second-guessed himself, decided to risk it (hey, she’d started the conversation), swam through the air and bull’s-eyed the moving target of the doorway more through luck than skill.
    She was still embedded in her acceleration couch. Her face turned away as soon as he came into view.
    She kept up her end, though. “Where you going?”
    I don’t know. I don’t have a clue. “Commons. Galley.”
    “Other way. Two spokes over.”
    “Thanks.”
    She said nothing. Her eyes jiggled in their sockets. Every now and then a ruby highlight winked off her cornea as some unseen laser read commands there.
    “Meatspace display,” Brüks tried after a moment.
    “What about it?”
    “I thought everyone here used ConSensus.”
    “This is ConSensus.”
    He tapped his temple. “I mean, you know. Cortical.”
    “Wireless can bite my clit anyone can peek.”
    The fruit of her labor sprawled across a good twenty degrees of the dome, a light storm of numbers and images and—over on the far left side—a stack of something that looked like voiceprints. It didn’t look like any kind of astrogation display Brüks had ever seen.
    She was spelunking the cache.
    “I can peek,” he said. “I’m peeking right now.”
    “Why should I care about you?” Sengupta snorted.
    Cats and dogs, he thought, and held his tongue. 
    He tried again. “So I guess I’ve got you to thank for that?” 
    “Thank for what?”
    He gestured at weeks-old echoes plastered across the sky. “Grabbing that snapshot on the way out. Don’t know what I’d do for the next twelve days if I didn’t have some kind of Quinternet access.”
    “Sure why not. You’re eating our food you’re huffing our O2 why not suck our data while you’re at it.”
    I give up.
    He turned and headed back to the exit. He felt Sengupta shift in the couch behind him.
    “I hate that fucking vampire she moves all wrong.”
    It was nice to know that basic predator-aversion subroutines survived the augments, Brüks reflected.
    “And I wouldn’t trust Colonel Carnage, either,” Sengupta added. “No matter how much he cozies up to you.”
    He looked back. The pilot floated against the loose restraints of her couch, unmoving, staring straight ahead.
    “Why’s that?” Brüks asked.
    “Trust him then do what you want. I don’t give a shit.”
    He waited a moment longer. Sengupta sat as still as a stick insect.
    “Thanks,” he said at last, and dropped through the floor.
    
    <#>

    So that’s what I am then. A parasite.
    He descended into the Lab. 
    Some half-dead fossil, scooped up in passing from the battlefield. Patched together for no better reason than the firing of a few mirror neurons, some vestigial itch we might have once called pity. 
    The equipment wasn’t his, but the workbench provided some degree of plastic comfort: a bit of surrogate familiarity in a ship too full of long bones and strange creatures. 
    Worse than ballast: I suck their O2 and eat their supplies and take up precious airspace millions of klicks from the nearest real atmosphere. Less than a pet: they don’t want my company, feel no urge to scritch my ears, aren’t interested in any tricks I might know except staying invisible and playing dead. 
    Sequence/splicer, universal incubator, optoelectron nanoscope with a respectable thirty-picometer threshold. All reassuringly familiar in a world where he’d half expected the very dust to be built out of miracles and magic crystals. Maybe that was deliberate: a security blanket for strays who’d missed the Singularity.
    Okay, then. I’m a parasite. Parasites are not destroyed by the powerful: parasites feed on them. Parasites use the powerful to their own ends.
    The lower level was empty except for a short stack of folded chairs and half-dozen cargo cubes (fab-matter stockpiles, according to the manifest). Brüks unslung the tent and spread it across the deck against a curve of bulkhead. 
    A tapeworm may not be as smart as its host but that doesn’t stop it from scamming shelter and nourishment and a place to breed. Good parasites are invisible; the best are indispensable. Gut bacteria, chloroplasts, mitochondria: all parasites, once. All invisible in the shadow of vaster beings. Now their hosts can’t live without them.
    The structure inflated into a kind of bulbous lozenge. It swelled igloolike toward the center of the compartment, molded itself against the walls and flooring behind. It wasn’t too different from his abandoned tent back in the desert; the piezoelectricity that buttressed the structure also powered the GUI sheathing its inner surface. Brüks ran an index finger down the center of the door. Its membranous halves snapped gently apart like a sheet of mesentery split down the middle.
    Some go even farther. Some get the upper hand, dig down and change the wiring right at the synapse. Dicrocoelium, Sacculina, Toxoplasma. Brainless things, all of them. Mindless creatures that turn inconceivably greater intellects into puppets.
    He dropped to his knees and crawled inside. The built-in hammock clung to the inner surface of the tent, ready to peel free and inflate at a touch. The default config only provided enough headroom for a crouch but Brüks couldn’t be bothered to dial up the headroom. Besides, the tight confines were strangely comforting down here at the very bottom of the spoke, just a few layers of alloy and insulation from the whole starry drum of the heavens rolling past beneath his feet. 
    So I’m a parasite? Fine. It is an honorable title.
    Down here, nestled in this warm and self-regulating little structure, he was as heavy as the Crown would let him be. He felt almost stable, almost rooted. And while he wouldn’t quite call it safety, he almost managed not to notice how like a burrow his quarters were: how deep in the earth, how far removed from other inhabitants of this pocket ecosystem. And how Daniel Brüks huddled against the deck like a mouse squeezed into the farthest corner of a great glass terrarium full of cobras, the lights turned up as bright as they would go.
     <tepi>If you are given a choice, you believe you have acted freely.
     <teps>—Raymond Teller
    
    Every hab started out like every other: same stand-alone life support, same snap-and-stretch frame guides to subdivide the living space to personal preference. Same basic bulkhead galley panel with a toilet on the other side. They all came with the same emergency hibe hookups, compatible with most popular pressure suits and long-distance coffins (not included). It was Boeing’s most generic all-purpose personarium, plucked off the shelf, bought in bulk, stuck on the ends of the Crown’s spokes on short notice. In the almost inconceivable event that one of those spokes should snap and send a hab tumbling off on its own, corporate guarantees ensured that the bodies therein would keep fresh and breathing (if inert) for up to a year or until atmospheric reentry, whichever came first.
    Which was not to say that custom features were out of the question. The fabber in Commons could whip up food with actual taste.
    Moore was the only other warm body in evidence when Brüks climbed down for breakfast. The Colonel didn’t return the other man’s smile at first—Brüks recognized the thousand-meter stare of the ConSensused—but the sound of Brüks feet on the deck brought him back to the impoverished world of mere meatspace.
    “Daniel,” he said.
    “Didn’t mean to disturb you,” Brüks said, which was a lie. He’d waited until the sparse constellations arrayed across the Crown’s intercom had aligned just so—Lianna or Moore in the Commons, Valerie anywhere else—before venturing forth in search of forage. 
    Moore waved the apology away. “I could do with a break anyway.”
    Brüks told the fabber to print him up a plate of French toast and bacon. “Break from what?”
    “Theseus telemetry,” Moore told him. “What little there is of it. Brushing up for the main event.”
    “There’s a main event? For us?”
    “How do you mean?”
    Brüks one-handed his meal to the Commons table (petroleum accents faintly adulterated the aroma of syrup and butter rising from the plate) and sat down. “Dwarves among giants, right? I didn’t get the sense there’d be any kind of active role for mere baselines.”
    He tried a strip of bacon. Not bad.
    “They have their reasons for being here,” Moore said mildly. “I have mine.” In a tone that said, And they’re not for sharing.
    “You deal with these guys a lot,” Brüks guessed.
    “These guys?”
    “Bicams. Post-Humans.”
    “They’re not post-Human. Not yet.”
    “How can you tell?” It was only half a joke.
    “Because otherwise we wouldn’t be able to talk to them at all.”
    Brüks swallowed a bolus of faux French toast. “They could talk to us. Some of them, anyway.”
    “Why would they bother? We’re on the verge of losing them as it is. And—do you have children, Daniel?”
    He shook his head. “You?”
    “A son. Siri’s not exactly baseline himself, actually. Nowhere near the far shore, but even so it’s been difficult to—connect, sometimes. And maybe this comparison won’t mean much to you, but—they’re all our children, Humanity’s children, and even now we can barely keep their interest . Once they tip over that edge…” He shrugged. “How long would it take you to decide you had better things to do than talk to a bunch of capuchins?”
    “They’re not gods,” Brüks reminded him softly. 
    “Not yet.”
    “Not ever.”
    “That’s denial.”
    “Better than genuflection.”
    Moore smiled, a bit ruefully. “Come on, Daniel. You know how powerful science can be. A thousand years to climb from ghosts and magic to technology; a day and a half from technology back up to ghosts and magic.”
    “I thought they didn’t use science,” Brüks said. “I thought that was the whole point.”
    Moore granted it with a small nod. “Either way, you put baselines against Bicamerals and the Bicamerals are going to be a hundred steps ahead every time.”
    “And you’re comfortable with that.”
    “My comfort doesn’t enter into it. Just the way it is.”
    “You seem so—fatalistic about it all.” Brüks pushed his empty plate aside. “The far shore, the gulf between giants and capuchins.”
    “Not fatalism,” Moore corrected him. “Faith.”
    Brüks glanced sharply across the table, trying to decide if Moore was yanking his chain. The soldier stared back impassively.
    “The fact that something shot us,” Brüks continued deliberately. “And you yourself said they’re probably Tran.”
    “I did, didn’t I?” Moore seemed to find that amusing. “Fortunately we’ve got a pretty good team of those in our own corner. Honestly, I wouldn’t worry.”
    “You trust them too much,” Brüks said quietly.
    “So you keep saying. You don’t know them the way I do.”
    “You think you know them? You’re the one who called them giants. We don’t know their agendas any more than we know what those smart clouds are up to. At least smart clouds don’t open up your brain and dig around like, like...”
    Moore didn’t say anything for a moment. Then: “Lianna.”
    “You know what they did to her?”
    “Not exactly.”
    “That’s exactly my point. No one does. Lianna doesn’t know. They shut her off for four days, and when she woke up she was some kind of Chinese Room savant. Who knows what they did to her brain? Who knows if she’s the same person?”
    “She’s not,” Moore said flatly. “Change the wiring, change the machine.”
    “That’s what I’m saying.”
    “She agreed to it. She volunteered. She worked her ass off and elbowed her way to the front of the line just for the chance to make the cut.”
    “It’s not informed consent.”
    That raised eyebrow again. “How so?” 
    “How can it be, when the person giving it is cognitively incapable of understanding what she’s agreeing to?”
    “So you’re saying she’s mentally incompetent,” Moore said.
    “I’m saying we all are. Next to the hives, and the vampires, and the thumbwirers and that whole—”
    “We’re children.”
    “Yes.”
    “Who can’t be trusted to make our own decisions.”
    Brüks shook his head. “Not about things like this, no.”
    “We need adults to make those choices on our behalf.”
    “We—” He fell silent. 
    Moore watched him above the ghost of a smile. After a moment he pulled the Glenmorangie off the wall. 
    “Have a drink,” he said. “Helps the future go down easier.”
    
    <#>
    
    Crawling unseen through the viscera of its host, the parasite takes control.
    Daniel Brüks drilled into the central nervous system of the Crown of Thorns and bent it to his will. Lianna, as usual, was back in the Hold with her helpless omnipotent masters. Sengupta’s icon glowed in the Hub. Moore was ostensibly in the Dorm but the feed from that hab put the lie to it: only his body was there, running on autopilot while his closed eyes danced through some ConSensual realm Brüks could only imagine.
    He was going to be eating alone.
    The anxiety had become chronic by now. It nagged at the bottom of his brain like a toothache, had become so much a part of him that it went unnoticed save for those times when some unexpected chill brought it all back. Panic attacks; in the spokes, in the habs, in his own goddamn tent. They didn’t happen often, and they never lasted long. Just often enough to remind him. Just long enough to keep him paranoid. 
    The blade began to twist as he ascended the spoke. Brüks gritted his teeth, briefly closed his eyes as the conveyer pulled him past the Zone of Terror (it helped, really it did), relaxed as the haunted zone receded beneath him. He released the handhold at the top of the spoke and coasted into the Hub, crossed the antarctic hatch (half contracted now, barely wide enough for the passage of a body) pushed himself toward—
    A soft wet sound. A cough from the northern hemisphere, a broken breath.
    Someone crying.
    Sengupta was up there. Had been a few minutes ago, at least.
    He cleared his throat. “Hello?”
    A brief rustle. Silence and ventilators.
    Ohhkay... 
    He resumed his course, crossed to the Commons spoke, twisted and jackknifed through. He allowed himself a moment of self-congratulation as he grabbed the conveyer and started down headfirst, smoothly swinging around the handhold until his feet pointed down; just two days ago all these drainpipes and variable-gravity straightaways would have left him completely disoriented.
    Valerie tagged him halfway.
    He never saw her coming. He had his face to the bulkhead. There may have been a flicker of overhead shadow, just a split second before that brief touch between his shoulder blades: like a knife’s edge sliding along his spine, like being unzipped down the back. His back brain reacted before he was even aware of the contact, flattened and froze him like a startled rabbit. By the time he could move again she was past and gone and Daniel Brüks was still alive.
    He looked down, down that long tunnel she’d sailed headfirst and without a sound. She was waiting at the bottom of the spoke: white and naked and almost skeletal. Wiry corded muscle stretched over bone. Her right foot tapped a strange and disquieting pattern on the metal.
    The conveyer was delivering him into her arms.
    He released the handhold, lunged across the spoke for the static safety of the ladder. He missed the first rung he grabbed for, caught the second; leftover momentum nearly popped his shoulder from its socket. His feet scrabbled for purchase, finally found it. He clung to the ladder as the conveyer streamed past to each side, going up going down.
    Valerie looked up at him. He looked away.
    She just touched me for Christ’s sake. I barely even felt it. It was probably an accident.
    No accident.
    She hasn’t threatened you, she hasn’t raised a hand. She’s just—sitting there. Waiting.
    Not in her hab. Not kept at bay by bright lights, no matter what comforting lies Moore had recited.
    Brüks kept his eyes on the bulkhead. He swore he could feel the baring of her teeth. 
    She’s just another failed hominoid. That’s all she is. Without our drugs she couldn’t even handle a few right angles without going into convulsions. Just another one of nature’s fuckups, just another extinct monster ten thousand years dead. 
    And brought back to life. And chillingly, completely at home in the future. More at home than Daniel Brüks had ever felt.
    She wouldn’t even be alive if it weren’t for us. If we roaches hadn’t scraped up all those leftover genes and spliced them back together again. She had her day. She’s nothing to be afraid of. Don’t be such a fucking coward.
    “Coming?”
    With effort he looked down, managed to fix his gaze on the edge of the hatch behind her, kept her eyes in that great comforting wash of low resolution that made up 95 percent of the human visual field. He even managed to answer, after a fashion: “I, um…”
    His hands stayed locked on the ladder.
    “Suit yourself,” Valerie said, and disappeared into the Commons.
    
    <#>

    Motion through the grille: the pixilated mosaic that was Rakshi Sengupta, returning from some place farther forward. The lav in the attic, perhaps. Brüks found it perfectly understandable that Sengupta might choose to leave for a piss at the same moment Valerie happened to be passing through.
    She fell into eclipse behind the mirrorball. Brüks heard the sound of buckles and plugs clicking into place, a grunt that might have passed for a greeting: “Thought you were headed for Commons.”
    He swam into the northern hemisphere. Sengupta was pulling a ConSensus glove over her left hand: middle finger, ring, index, little, thumb. Her hair stood out from her head, crackling faintly with static electricity.
    “Valerie got there first,” he said.
    “Room for two down there.” Right glove: middle, ring, index... 
    “There really isn’t.”
    She still refused to look at him, of course. But the smile was encouraging.
    “Nasty cunt doesn’t even use the galley.” Sengupta’s tone was conspiratorial. “Only comes out of her hab to scare us.”
    “How’d she even end up here?” Brüks wondered.
    Sengupta did something with her eyes, a little jiggle that said command interface. “There. Now we’ll see her coming.” Her elbows moved out from her body and back in, a precise stubby wingbeat. Brüks couldn’t tell whether it was interface or OCD. “Anyhow why ask me?”
    “I thought you’d know.”
    “You were there I just fished you all out of the atmosphere.”
    “No, I mean—where’s she even from? Vampires are supposed to live in comfy little compounds where they fight algos and solve Big Problems and don’t threaten anybody. It’s not like anyone would be stupid enough to let them off the leash. So how does Valerie show up in the desert with a pack of zombies and an army aerostat?”
    “Smart little monsters,” Sengupta said, too loud. (Brüks stole a nervous glance through the perforated deck.) “I’d start making crosses if I were you.”
    “No good. They’ve got those drug pumps in their heads. AntiEuclideans.”
    “Things change, baseline. Adapt or die.” Sengupta’s head bobbed like a bird’s. “I don’t know where she comes from. I’m working on it, though. Don’t trust her at all don’t like the way she moves.”
    Neither do I, Brüks thought.
    “Maybe her friends can tell us,” Sengupta said.
    “What friends?”
    “The ones she got away from, I’ve been looking and—hey you’re a big-time biologist right? You go to conferences and all?”
    “One or two, maybe. I’m not that big-time.” Mostly he just virtualized; his grants weren’t big enough to let him jet his actual biomass around the planet. 
    Besides, these days most of his colleagues weren’t all that happy to see him anyway.
    “Shoulda gone to this one,” Sengupta bit her lip and summoned a video archive onto the wall. It was a standard floatcam view of a typical meeting hall in a typical conference: she’d muted the sound but the sight was more than familiar. Seated rows of senior faculty decked out in thermochrome and conjoined flesh-sculpture; grad students dressed down in ties and blazers of dumbest synth. A little corral off to one side where a few dozen teleops stood like giant stick insects or chess pieces on treads, rented mechanical shells for the ghosts of those who couldn’t afford the airfare. 
    The speaker of the hour stood behind the usual podium. The usual flatscreen stretched out behind him; the usual corporate hologram spun lazily above it all, reminding the assembled of where they were and whose generous sponsorship had made it all possible:
    
    <ext>Fizerpharm Presents
    The 22nd Biennial J. Craig Ventor Memorial Conference
    on Synthetic and Virtual Biology
    
    “Not really my thing,” Brüks admitted. “I’m more into—”
    “There!” Sengupta crowed, and froze the feed.
    At first he couldn’t see what she was getting at. The man at the podium, petrified in midmotion, gestured at a matrix of head shots looming behind him on the screen. Just another one of those eye-glazing group dioramas that infested academic presentations the world over: I’d like to take this opportunity to thank all those wonderful folks who assisted in this research because there’s no fucking way I’ll ever give them actual coauthorship.
    Then Brüks’s eyes focused, and his gut clenched a little.
    Not collaborators, he saw: subjects.
    He could tick off the telltales in his head, one by one: the pallor, the facial allometry, the angles of cheekbone and mandible. The eyes: Jesus Christ, those eyes. An image filtered through three generations, a picture of a picture of a picture, fractions of faces degraded down to a few dark pixels and they still sent cold tendrils up his spine.
    All these things he could itemize, given time. But the brainstem chill shrank his balls endless milliseconds before his gray matter could have ever told him why.
    The Uncanny Valley on steroids, he thought.
    For the first time he noticed the text glowing on the front of the podium, the thumbnailed intel of a talk already in progress: Paglino, R. J., Harvard—Evidence of Heuristic Image Processing in the Vampire Retina.
    Sengupta drummed her fingers, fed the roach a clue: “Second row third column.” 
    Valerie’s face. Oh yes.
    “They make ’em hard to track,” she complained. “Keep changing ID codes move them around. All proprietary information and filing errors and can’t let the vampire liberation front know where the kennels are but I got her now I got her now I got the first piece of the puzzle.”
    Valerie the vampire. Valerie the lab rat. Valerie the desert demon, mistress of the undead, scorched-earth army of one. Rakshi Sengupta had her.
    “Good luck,” Brüks said.
    But the pilot had already brought up another window, a list of names and affiliations. Authors and attendees, it looked like. Some were flagged. Brüks squinted at the list, scanned it for whatever commonality might bind those highlighted names together.
    Ah. Resident Institution: Simon Fraser. 
    “She had friends,” Sengupta murmured, almost to herself. “I bet she got away from ’em.
    “I bet they want her back.”
     <tepi>Reality is that which, when you stop believing in it, doesn’t go away.
     <teps>—Phillip K. Dick
    
    Jim Moore was dancing.
    There was no floor to speak of. No partner. Not even any witnesses until Daniel Brüks climbed into the Hub; the command deck was uncharacteristically quiet, no tapping toes or clicking tongues, none of the staccato curses that Sengupta barked out when some command or interface didn’t see things her way. Moore was alone in the cluttered landscape, leaping from a stack of cargo cubes, rebounding off some haphazard plateau halfway down, hitting the deck for just a split-second in a perfect barefoot crouch before bouncing back into the air: one arm tight across his chest, the other jabbing at some invisible partn—
    Opponent, Brüks realized. Those open-handed strikes on empty air, that heel coming down with a snap against a passing bulkhead; those were combat moves. Whether he was interacting with a virtual partner in ConSensus or merely faking it old school, Brüks had no idea.
    The dancing warrior caught a loose strap of cargo webbing floating from the grille, swung legs overhead and planted them against the bulkhead: hands pulling against strap in lieu of gravity, legs pushing back from the grille in opposition, a human tripod planted against the wall like a three-legged spider. Brüks could clearly see his face. Moore wasn’t even breathing through the mouth.
    “Nice moves,” Brüks said.
    Moore looked right past him and lifted his feet without a word, turning slowly around the strap like a windmill in a light breeze.
    “Uh…”
    “Shhh.”
    He jumped a little at the hand on his arm. “You don’t want to wake him up,” Lianna said softly.
    “He’s asleep?” Brüks looked back at the ceiling; Moore was spinning more quickly now, head out, legs spread in a V, the strap winding tighter between man and metal. In the next instant he was airborne again.
    “Sure.” Lianna’s dreads bobbed gently in the wake of her nod. “What, you stay awake when you exercise? You don’t find it, um, boring?”
    He didn’t know whether she was taking a shot at the thought of Dan Brüks coming equipped with some kind of sleepwalking option, or the equally ludicrous thought of Dan Brüks working out.
    “Why do it at all? A dose of AMPK agonist and he’s a hardbody even if he lies in bed snarfing bonbons all day.” 
    “Maybe he doesn’t want to depend on augments that can be hacked. Maybe the endorphins give him happier dreams. Maybe old habits die hard.”
    Moore sailed over their heads, stabbing the air. Brüks ducked despite himself.
    Lianna chuckled. “Don’t worry about that. He can see us just fine.” She caught herself: “Something in there can, anyway.” A kick and a glide took her to the port staircase. “Anyway, don’t waste your time with that loser—the moment he wakes up he’ll just dive back into his Theseus files.” She jerked her chin. “I’ve got some time to kill. Come play with me instead.”
    “Play w—” But she’d already turned like a fish and darted down the spoke. He followed her back to the heavy quarters, to the Commons where Moore’s green bottle and his own abandoned gimp hood clung to the bulkhead between bands of minty astroturf. 
    “Play what?” he asked, catching up. “Tag?”
    She grabbed his hood off the wall and tossed it to him, flumping into a convenient hammock in a single smooth motion. “Anything you want. Deity Smackdown. Body-swap boxing is kinda fun. Oh, and there’s a Kardashev sim I’m pretty good at, but I promise to go easy on you.”
    He turned the Interloper Accessory over in his hands. The frontal superconductors stared up at him like a pair of startled eyes.
    “You do remember that’s mainly a gaming hood, right?”
    He shook his head. “I don’t game.”
    Lianna eyed him as though he’d just claimed to be a hydrangea. “Why ever not?”
    Of course he couldn’t tell her. “It’s not real.”
    “It’s not supposed to be,” she explained, surprisingly patient. “That’s what makes them games.”
    “Doesn’t feel real.”
    “Yeah it does.”
    “Not to me.”
    “Yeah it does.”
    “Not to—”
    “Not to put too fine a point on it, Oldschool, but Yes it does.”
    “Don’t lecture me about my own perceptions, Lee.”
    “It’s the same neurons! The same signal running up the same wiring, and there’s absolutely no way your brain can tell the difference between an electron that came all the way from your retina and one that got injected midstream. Absolutely no way.”
    “Doesn’t feel real,” he insisted. “Not to me. And I’m not playing Porn Star Cat Wars with you.”
    “Just try, man.”
    “Play the AI. It’ll give you a better run for your money anyway.”
    “It’s not the sa—”
    “Hah!”
    Lianna’s face fell. “Fuck. Skewered by my own position statement.”
    “By a roach, no less. How’s it feel?”
    “Like I just punched myself in the nose,” she admitted.
    Neither spoke for a moment.
    “Just once? For me?”
    “I don’t game.” 
    “Okay, okay. No harm in asking.”
    “Now you’ve asked.”
    “Okay.” She swung back and forth in the hammock for a few seconds. (There was something a little off about that motion, a hinted half-spiral oscillation. Coriolis was a subtle trickster.) 
    “If it makes you feel any better,” she said after a while, “I kinda know what you mean.”
    “About?”
    “About things not seeming real. I actually feel that way all the time. Gaming’s the only time I don’t feel that way.”
    “Huh,” Brüks grunted, a little surprised. “I wonder why.”
    And after a moment’s thought: “Probably the company you keep.”
    
    <#>
    
    Someone had set up a second tent next to his, stuck it like an engorged white blood cell right at the base of the ladder. Brüks had to effect a half hop sideways off the second rung to avoid bumping it. Something rustled and muttered inside.
    “Hello?”
    Sengupta stuck her head out, stared at the deck. “Roach.”
    Brüks coughed. “You know, that doesn’t actually sound as much like a compliment as you might think.”
    She didn’t seem to hear him. “You should see this,” she said, and withdrew.
    And poked her head out again after a few seconds: “Well come on.”
    He hunkered gingerly down into the tent. Sengupta crouched at its center. Patches of flickering intelligence swarmed across the fabric: columns of numbers; crude plastic-skinned portraits rendered by some computer sketch artist struggling with insufficient eye-witness data; rows of—home addresses, from the look of it.
    “What’s this?”
    “Nothing you care about.” Reflected lightning played across her face. “Just some fucker going to be eating his own guts when I get hold of him.” She waved one hand and the collage disappeared.
    “You do realize they’ve got a whole hab set up as a dorm,” Brüks said.
    “That’s too crowded nobody uses this one.”
    “I use—” Never mind.
    A roommate might not be so bad, he reflected. He’d have never sought one out—good parasites do not draw attention to themselves, no matter how lonely the lifestyle—but if things went south, maybe Valerie would eat Rakshi first. Buy him some time.
    “Watch this best party trick ever.” 
    She threw a video feed onto the wall: rowdy voices, flashing lights, a mag-lev table wobbling at an insane angle thanks to the drunken asshole trying to dance on the damn thing. Campus bar. The student ambience would be a dead giveaway anywhere on the planet but Brüks was pretty sure it was somewhere in Europe. The subtitler was off but he caught snatches of German and Hungarian at least.
    A couple of grad students had randomly arranged a dozen empty beer glasses on a table. A crowd of others cheered and chanted and pulled chairs away, clearing a surrounding space. Something was happening stage left, just out of camera range: an antidisturbance, a sudden contagious quelling of noise and commotion that drew eyes and spread around the circle in an instant. The camera turned toward the eye in the storm. Brüks sucked in his breath.
    Valerie again.
    She stalked into the cleared floor space like a spring-loaded panther, unleashed, autonomous. She wore the cheap throwaway smart-paper weave ubiquitous to lab rats and convicts the world over; it seemed absurd against the jostling background of blazers and holograms and bioluminescent tattoos. Valerie didn’t seem to notice her own violation of the dress code; didn’t notice the way the front lines pushed back against the crowd as she passed, or the way the murmuring horde fell silent when she got too close. She had eyes only for the glasses on the table.
    What kind of suicidal idiot would take a vampire to a bar? How zoned had these people been, to not be fleeing for the exits? 
    “Where did you get—”
    “Shut up and watch!”
    Valerie circled the table, once. She hesitated for a moment, her eyes unfocused, something that might almost have been a smile playing across her lips.
    In the next instant, she sprang.
    She came down on one bare foot, almost three meters from a standing start; snapped the other down with a stomp, spun and stamped again and jumped—arcing backward this time, over the table itself, flipping in midair and landing in a four-point crouch (left foot right foot right knee left hand) before hopping to the left (stomp), hand-springing forward to land chest-to-face with some semisober sessional who still had enough animal sense to turn greeny-white under a face loaded with retconned chloroplasts. Straight up, now: a vertical one-meter leap with a one-legged landing; about-face (stomp), two diagonal steps toward the table (stomp). Both elbows, one knee crashing simultaneously against ancient floorboards that bounced her smoothly back into a standing position. Finis. After a moment, the camera, shaking despite the very best image-stabilization algorithms a student budget could buy, panned back to the table.
    The glasses were arranged in a perfectly straight, evenly spaced line.
    “Hard to find this one someone snuck her out the back door you take a vampire out without authorization and your career is over so they really kept the evidence locked up I think it was an initiation or something...”
    The view hovered over the tableaux for a long, disbelieving moment. Swung back to the monster who had created it. Valerie stared straight through the camera and a thousand kilometers beyond, smiled that patented bone-chilling smile. She wasn’t even breathing hard.
    Everyone else was, though. Reality was finally cutting through the drinks and the drugs and the sheer idiotic bravado of spoiled children raised on promises of immortality. They were in the presence of black magic. They were in the presence of something whose most trivial efforts turned the very laws of motion into feats of telekinesis. And one sodden instant behind all that awe and stunned disbelief, perhaps, the realization of just what all that vast intelligence, all those superconducting motor skills had evolved in the service of.
    Hunting.
    It didn’t matter what bedtime stories these privileged brats had been told. They were not immortal in such a presence. They were only breakfast. And it was obvious to Brüks—from the way they pulled back and muttered their excuses, the way they edged for doors while keeping their backs to walls, the way even those pretending to be in charge averted their eyes as they scuttled sidelong up to Valerie and told her in weak and shaking voices that it was time to come in now—that they finally knew it.
    It was also obvious, in hindsight, that Brüks had been uncharitable to the baselines who’d stolen their rat from its cage for one wild night out. Whoever they were, they hadn’t been suicidal. They hadn’t been idiots. No matter what they might have told themselves before or after, no matter who remembered having the idea.
    It hadn’t really been their decision at all.
    
    <#>
    
    The gimp hood did amp his learning curve. Brüks had to admit that much.
    Data once forced to timeshare the cramped real estate between bands of astroturf stretched luxuriously around him along three axes and three hundred sixty degrees of infinite space. Options he would have had to make eye contact with on a smart-paint display leapt front and center the moment he so much as thought about them. Information that he’d normally have to read, and repeat, and review—it seemed to just stick in the brain with a glance and a swallow. He was used to cognitive enhancers, of course, but this had to be Bicameral tech; he couldn’t imagine that even surgical augments would deliver a bigger boost.
    Three trillion nodes and a ten-thousand-link search radius was a pretty impoverished echo of the actual Quinternet, but you could still dig for a thousand lifetimes and never reach its edge. Instant expertise in a million disciplines. Interactive novels you didn’t even have to play, first-person eidetic memories that planted themselves directly into your head if you had the interface (Brüks didn’t, but this came close), served up all the thrills and wonder and experience of just having played without even needing to set aside the time to inhabit the story in real time. Indelible footprints of all the things the Noosphere deemed worthy of remembrance.
    Even after fourteen years, Theseus was all over it.
    The shock, the disbelief in the wake of Firefall. Riots in every color of the rainbow: terrified hordes fleeing the coming apocalypse, not knowing which way to run; demonstrations against movers and shakers who’d always known more than they let on; looters with short attention spans, thinking only of all that swag left undefended while panicked populations hid under their beds or lashed back against uniforms whose guns and drones and area-denial weaponry were finally, after uncounted decades of casual and brutal unaccountability, just not up to the challenge. Tens of thousands returning from Heaven, fearful of new threats from the real world. Millions more fleeing into it, for pretty much the same reason.
    And then, Theseus: the Mother Of All Megaprojects. A mission, a metaphor, a symbol of a shattered world reunited against the common threat. The brave souls who manned her, that small select force standing for Humanity against the cosmos. Amanda Bates, champion of countless WestHem campaigns: her skills so broad, her talents so highly classified that no one had even heard of her before her ascension to the Dream Team. Lisa Takamatsu, Nobel laureate, linguist and den mother to a half dozen separate personalities living in her own head. Jukka Sarasti, the noble vampire, the lion who’d lain down with lambs and was ready to give his life on their behalf. Siri Keeton, synthesist, ambassador to ambassadors, bridge between—
    Wait a second—Siri?
    He’d heard that name before. He sifted through dusty old memories laid down before the upgrade. Bulletins and biography washed over them in the meantime: Siri Keeton, synthesist, top of a field consisting exclusively of people at the top of their field. Possessed by demons at the age of six, some convulsive virus straight out of the Middle Ages that lit up his brain with electrical storms. It would have killed him outright if radical surgery hadn’t snatched him back from the brink, patched him up, left him scarred and scared and possessed of something altogether new: a fierce never-say-die dedication to beating the odds, the world, to beating his own mutinous brain into submission and getting the job done, all the way out to the very edge of the solar system and beyond.
    (Siri’s not exactly baseline himself, actually...)
    Almost nothing about his home life. No home vids, no leaked grade-school psych work-ups. An only child, apparently. Mother not mentioned at all, father left unnamed, a shadowy background figure that refused to come into focus except for one passing reference in TimeSpace: 
    
    <ext>...owes his single-minded pursuit of personal goals as much to his childhood battle with epilepsy as to his upbringing as a soldier’s son...
    
    Brüks turned the words over in his head, searching for coincidence.
    “Yah Colonel Carnage had to go out and get his baby almost killed don’tcha know. Before he was even born.”
    The low gravity was no friend; Brüks jumped so high he cracked his head on the ceiling. 
    “Je-sus!” He pulled back the hood. Sengupta appeared between the interface dissolving in his head and the backup resurrecting on the bulkhead behind her. I have got to figure out the privacy settings on this thing, Brüks told himself. Not that they’d keep her from looking over his shoulder if she really wanted to, he supposed.
    “Where did you come from?”
    “I’ve been here all along five minutes at least.”
    “Well say something next time. Announce yourself.” He rubbed the sore spot on his head. “What are you doing here anyway?”
    Sengupta smacked her lips and cast sidelong eyes at her tent. “Hunting a dead man.” 
    I am the only meat sack on this whole damn ship who isn’t some kind of predator. “Hunting what?” One of the zombies?
    “Not on board I mean like you—” Snapping her fingers at the ConSensus display— “hunting him.”
    Brüks looked back at the wall: a factoid collage, a palimpsest of puff pieces. It didn’t come anywhere close to biography.
    “Jim nearly got him killed?”
    “Yah I said that.” Snap snap.
    “Says here he had some kind of viral epilepsy.”
    Sengupta snorted. “They had to cut out half his brain for viral epilepsy right. Like anyone on Carnage’s salary has to settle for leeches and laudanum when his brat gets sick.”
    “So what was it then?”
    “Viral something,” Sengupta crowed. “Viral zombieism.”
    Ventilator sounds filled the sudden silence.
    “Bullshit,” Brüks said softly.
    “Oh he didn’t do it deliberately the larva was just collateral. Some evildoer cooked up a basement bug but he got the fine-tuning wrong. Virus likes fetus brains way better than grown-up brains right? All that growth metabolism all that neural pruning everything moves faster so they give it to Mommy and she gives it to Daddy but it really takes off when it gets past that old-time placenta in the third tri. Goes through baby’s brain faster’n flesh-eating. Wake up next morning the little fucker’s already seizing in the womb and it’s lucky for them it’s their canary in the coal mine, they go down to Emerg and shoot up on antizombals, get cleaned out just in time. But too late for little Siri Keeton. He comes into the world and he’s already damaged goods and they deal with it best they can they try all the best drugs and all the best lattices but it’s downhill all the way and after a few years the seizures start up and that’s all they wrote on Siri Keeton’s left hemisphere right? Had to scrape it out like a rotten coconut.”
    “Jesus,” Brüks whispered, and glanced around despite himself.
    “Oh you don’t have to worry about him he’s way down deep in his precious Theseus signals.” An odd, single-shouldered shrug. “Anyway it all turned out okay though better’n before like I say. Storm troopers have really good medical plans. Replacement hemisphere’s a big improvement. Made him the man for the mission.”
    “What a horrible thing to do to a kid.”
    “If you can’t grow the code stay out of the incubator. Fucker probably did it himself to God knows how many others, that’s what they do.”
    Brüks had seen the footage, of course: civilian hordes reduced to walking brainstems by a few kilobytes of weaponized code drawn to the telltale biochemistry of conscious thought. It wasn’t the precise surgical excision of cognitive inefficiency, not the military’s reversible supersoldiers or Valerie’s programmed bodyguards. It was consciousness and intellect just chewed away from cortex to hypothalamus, Humanity reduced to fight/flight/fuck. It was people turned back into reptiles.
    It was also a hell of an effective strategy for anyone on a budget: cheap, contagious, terrifyingly effective. If you were caught in some panicking crowd you could never be sure whether the person pushing from behind was trying to rape you, or bash in your skull, or just get the fuck out of the zone. If you were above the crowd all your state-of-the-art telemetry would never tell the undead from the merely undone; not even Tran tech could pick out the fractional chill of a zombie brain inside its skull, not from a distance, not through a wall or a roof, not in the middle of a riot. All you could do was seal off the area and try to keep upwind until the flamethrowers showed up.
    They had special squads for that in India, Brüks had heard. People with off switches in their heads, fighting fire with fire. They were really good at their jobs. 
    “Had it coming you ask me,” Sengupta hissed.
    “Jesus, Rakshi.” Brüks shook his head. “What do you have against that guy?”
    “Nothing I don’t have against any jackboot who fucks people over and then’s all just following orders.” She poked at some unseen irritant with the toe of her boot. “Look I know you two are dating or whatever okay? Fine with me tell him whatever you want just don’t be surprised when he fucks you over. He’ll feed you into the meat grinder the moment he thinks it serves his greater good. Feed himself in, too, for that matter. I swear sometimes I don’t know which is worse.”
    Neither spoke for a few moments.
    “Why are you telling me this?” Brüks asked at last.
    “Why not?”
    “You’re not afraid I’ll pass it on?”
    Sengupta barked. “Like you would. Besides he can’t blame me if he stomps his muddy footprints all over the ’base for anyone to see. You coulda seen ’em even.”
    Why do I put up with her? Brüks asked himself for the tenth time. And then, for the first: Why does she put up with me?
    But he thought he knew that answer already. He’d suspected it at least since she’d moved in next door: Sengupta liked him, in a weird twisted way. Not sexually. Not as a colleague or a peer, not even as a friend. Sengupta liked Daniel Brüks because he was easy to impress. She didn’t think of him as a person at all; she thought of him as a kind of pet.
    Shitty social skills. Rakshi Sengupta was too contemptuous of etiquette to be bothered. But the fact that she didn’t abide by social cues didn’t mean she couldn’t read them. She’d read him well enough, at least; there was no way he’d ever tell Jim Moore what Sengupta had learned about his son. Not Dan Brüks. 
    He was a good boy.
    
    <#>
    
    The next time he saw Lianna, he didn’t.
    He heard her voice—“Whoa, watch that—” just a second before the hab tilted crazily askance and pain shot up from—in from…
    Actually, he didn’t know where the pain was coming from. It just hurt.
    “Holy Heyzeus Dan, you didn’t see that?” Lianna popped magically into existence beside the Commons coffee table as he blinked up from the deck.
    The table, he realized. I ran into the table…
    He shook his head to clear it. Lianna vanished again—
    “Hey—”
    —and reappeared. 
    Brüks hauled himself to his feet, pulled the gimp mask off his face as the pain settled in his left shin. “There’s something wrong with this thing. It’s screwing with my eyes.”
    She reached out and took it. “Looks okay. What were you doing?”
    “Just trawling the cache. Thought I’d bookmarked an article but I can’t find the damn thing.”
    “You encrypt the search?”
    Brüks shook his head. Lianna far-focused into ConSensus. “Szpindel et al? ‘Gamma-protocadherin and the role of the PCDH11Y ortholog’”?
    “That’s the one.”
    “It’s right here.” She frowned, handed back the gimp hood. “Try again.”
    He pulled it back on over his head. Search results reappeared in the air before him, but Szpindel wasn’t among them. “Still nothing.”
    “Hmm,” Lianna said, and vanished.
    “Where are you? You just dis—”
    She leaned back into view from nowhere in particular.
    “—appeared.”
    “There’s the problem,” she said, and peeled the gimp hood back off his scalp. “Induced hemineglect. Probably a bad superconductor.”
    “Hemineglect?”
    “See why you should get augged? You could just pull up a subtitle, know exactly what I’m talking about.”
    “See why I don’t?” Brüks conjured up a definition out of smart paint. “Nobody has to cut my head open to replace a bad superconductor.”
    Broken brains that split the body down the middle and threw half of it away: an inability to perceive anything to the left of the body’s midline, to even conceive of anything there. People who only combed their hair on the right side with their right hands, who only saw food on the right side of their plates. People who just forgot about half the universe.
    “That is fucked,” Brüks said, quietly awed.
    Lianna shrugged. “Like I said, a bad superconductor. We got spares, though; faster’n fabbing a replacement.” 
    He followed her through the ceiling. “So you never told me why you were so old school,” she said over her shoulder.
    “Fear of vivisection. When superconductors go bad. We covered this.”
    “The reason that stuff goes bad is because it’s crappy old tech. Internal augs are less failure-prone than your own brain.”
    “So they’ll work flawlessly when some spambot hacks in and leaves me with an irresistible urge to buy a year’s supply of bubble bath for cats.” 
    “Hey, at least the augs are firewalled. It’s way easier to hack a raw brain, if that’s what you’re worried about.
    “Then again,” she added, “I don’t think it is.”
    He sighed. “No. I guess it isn’t.”
    “What, then?”
    They emerged into the southern hemisphere. Their reflections, thin as eels, slid across the mirrorball as they passed.
    “Know what a funnel-web spider is?” Brüks asked at last.
    After the barest hesitation: “I do now.” And a moment later, “Oh. The neurotoxins.”
    “Not just any neurotoxins. This one was special. Pharm refugee maybe, or just some open-source hobby that got loose. Might have even been beneficial under other circumstances, for all I know. The little fucker got away. But I felt a nip, right about here”—he spread the fingers of one hand, tapped the webbing between thumb and forefinger with the other—“and I was flat on my back ten seconds later.” He snorted softly. “Taught me not to go sampling without gloves, anyway.”
    They crossed the equator, single file. No one in the northern hemisphere.
    “Didn’t kill you though,” Lianna observed shrewdly.
    “Nah. Just induced the mother of all allergic responses to nanopore antiglials. Any kind of direct neural interface finishes what that little bugger started.”
    “They could fix that, you know.” Lianna bounced off the deck and glided along the forward ladder, Brüks clambering in her wake. 
    “Sure they could. I could take some proprietary drug for the rest of my life and let FizerPharm squeeze my balls every time they change their terms and conditions. Or I could get my whole immune system ripped out and replaced. Or I can take a couple of pills every day.”
    The attic.
    A warren of pipes and conduits, an engineering subbasement at the top of the ship. Plumbing, docking hatches, great wraparound bands full of tools and spacesuits and EVA accessories. Stone Age control panels in the catastrophic event that anyone might need to take manual control. A stale breeze caressed Brüks’s face from some overhead ventilator; he tasted oil and electricity. Up ahead the docking airlock bulged to starboard like a tinfoil hubcap three meters across; a smaller lock, merely man-size, played sidekick across the compartment. Spacesuits drifted in their alcoves like dormant silver larvae. Portals and panels crowded the spaces between struts and LOX tanks and CO2 scrubbers: lockers, bus boards, a head gimbaled for variable gee. 
    Lianna cracked one of the lockers and began rummaging about inside.
    Yet another ladder climbed farther forward, out of the attic and up along a spire of dimly lit scaffolding. Afferent sensor array up there, according to the map. Maneuvering thrusters. And the parasol: that great wide conic of programmable metamaterial the Crown would hide behind when the sun got too close. Photosynthetic, according to the specs. Brüks didn’t know whether it would shuttle enough electrons to run whatever backup drive the Bicamerals were putting together, but at least hot showers were always an option.
    “Got it.” Lianna held up a greasy-looking gray washer, smiling.
    For a moment. The look of triumph drained from her face while Brüks watched; the expression left behind was bloodless and terrified. 
    “Lee…?”
    She sucked in breath, and didn’t let it out. She stared past his right shoulder as if he were invisible.
    He spun, expecting monsters. Nothing to see but the airlock. Nothing to hear but the clicks and sighs of the Crown of Thorns, talking to itself.
    “Do you hear that?” she whispered. Her eyes moved in terrified little saccades. “That—ticking…”
    He heard the sigh of recycled air breathed into cramped spaces, the soft rustle of empty spacesuits stirring in the breeze. He heard faint muffled sounds of movement from below: a scrape, a hard brief footfall. Brüks looked around the compartment, swept his eyes past alcoves and airlocks—
    Now he heard something: sharp, soft, arrhythmic. Not a ticking so much as a clicking, a sound like, like a clicking tongue perhaps. A hungry sound, from overhead.
    His stomach dropped away.
    He didn’t have to look. He didn’t dare to. Somehow he could feel her up there in the rafters: a dark predatory shadow, watching from places where the light couldn’t quite reach.
    The sound of teeth tapping together.
    “Shit,” Lianna whispered.
    She can’t be up there, Brüks thought. He’d checked the board before leaving the Commons. He always checked. Valerie’s icon had been down in her hab where it always was, a green dot among gray ones. She must have really moved.
    Of course, they could do that.
    Now those clicking teeth were so loud he didn’t know how he could have missed them. There was no pattern to that sound, no regular predictable rhythm. The silences between clicks stretched forever, drove him insane with trivial suspense; or snapped unexpectedly closed after a split second. 
    “Let’s—” Brüks swallowed, tried again. “Let’s get…”
    But Lianna was already headed aft.
    The Hub was bright light and sterile reflections: the soft glow of the walls chased Brüks’s fears back to the basement where they belonged. He looked at Lianna a bit sheepishly as they rounded the mirrorball.
    Lianna did not look sheepish at all. If anything, she looked more worried than she had in the attic. “She must have hacked the sensors.”
    “What do you mean?”
    She wiggled her fingers in midair; INTERCOM appeared on the bulkhead. Sengupta was astern near the Hold; Moore was back in the Dorm.
    Valerie’s icon glowed reassuring green, down in her own private hab with the grays.
    “Ship doesn’t know where she is anymore,” Lianna said. “She could be anywhere. Other side of any door you open.”
    “Why would she do that?” Brüks glanced up at the hole in the ceiling as Lianna grabbed the ladder. “What was she even doing up there?”
    “Did you see her?”
    He shook his head. “Couldn’t look.”
    “Me neither.”
    “So for all we know, she wasn’t even up there.”
    She managed a nervous laugh. “You wanna go back and check?”
    Here among the bright lights and the gleaming machinery, it was hard not to feel utterly ridiculous. Brüks shook his head. “Even if she is up there, so what? It’s not like she’s confined to quarters. It’s not like she did anything other than—grind her teeth.”
    “She’s a predator,” Lianna pointed out.
    “She’s a sadist. She’s been pushing my buttons since day one; I think she just gets off on it. Jim’s right: if she wanted to kill us we’d be dead already.”
    “Maybe this is how she kills us,” Lianna said. “Maybe she mambos.”
    “Mambos.”
    “Vodou works, Oldschool. Fear messes up your cardiac rhythms. Adrenaline kills heart cells. You can literally scare someone to death if you hack the sympathetic nervous system the right way.”
    So voodoo’s real, Brüks mused.
    Chalk one up for organized religion.
    
    <#>

    Moore was heading down when Brüks was heading out.
    “Hey Jim.”
    “Daniel.”
    It didn’t happen often anymore. Whether at meals or after, during the Crown’s bright blue day or the warmer shadows of its night cycle, the Colonel always seemed to be deep in ConSensus these days. He never talked about what he did there. Cramming for Icarus, of course. Reviewing the telemetry Theseus had sent before disappearing into the fog. But he kept those details to himself, even when he came out to breathe.
    Brüks stopped at the foot of the Commons ladder. “Hey, you want to see a movie?”
    “A what?”
    “The Silences of Pone. Like a game you can only watch. Lee says it’s one of—you know, back when they couldn’t just induce desired states directly. They had to manipulate you into feeling things. With plot and characters and so on.”
    “Art,” Moore said. “I remember.” 
    “Pretty crude by current standards but apparently it won a whole bunch of awards for neuroinduction back in the day. Lee found it in the cache, set up a feed. Says it’s worth watching.”
    “That woman is getting to you,” the Colonel remarked.
    “This whole fucking voyage is getting to me. You in?”
    He shook his head. “Still reviewing the telemetry.”
    “You’ve been doing that for a week now. You hardly come up for air.”
    “There’s a lot of telemetry.”
    “I thought they went in and went dark.”
    “They did.”
    “Almost immediately, you said.”
    “Almost is a relative term. Theseus had more eyes than a small corporation. Take a lifetime to sift through even a few minutes of that feed.”
    “For a baseline, maybe. Surely the Bicams have everything in hand.”
    Moore looked at him. “I thought you didn’t approve of blind faith in higher powers.”
    “I don’t approve of breaking your back pushing boulders uphill when you’re eyeprinted for the heavy lifter across the street, either. You said it yourself. They’re a hundred steps ahead of us. We’re just here to enjoy the ride.”
    “Not necessarily.”
    “How so?”
    “We’re here.  They’re stuck in decompression for the next six days.”
    “Right,” Brüks remembered. “Field-tested.”
    “Why they brought us along.” 
    Brüks grimaced. “They brought me along because I happened to stumble onto the highway and they didn’t have the heart to see me turn into roadkill.”
    The Colonel shrugged. “Doesn’t mean they can’t make the most of an opportunity when it presents itself.”
    Brüks’ fingertips tingled in remembrance. Opportunities, he realized with sudden dull surprise.
    I’m missing one.
    
    <#>
    
    It was a window in the crudest possible sense: a solid pane of transparent alloy, set into the rear bulkhead. You couldn’t zoom it or resize it or lay a tactical false-color overlay across its surface. You couldn’t even turn it off, unless someone on the other side brought down the blast shield. It was a clear, impenetrable hole in the ship: a circular viewport into an alien terrarium where, out past the ghostly reflection of his own face, strange hyperbaric creatures built monstrous artifacts out of sand and coral. Their eyes twinkled like green stars in the gloom.
    Six of the monks were resting, suspended in medical cocoons like dormant grubs waiting out the winter. The others moved purposeful as ants across a background of shadows and half-built machinery: a jumbled cityscape of tanks and stacked ceramic superconductors and segments of pipe big enough to walk through without ducking. Brüks was pretty sure that the patchwork sphere coming together near the center of the hold was shaping up to be the fusion chamber.
    Two of the Bicamerals huddled off to one side in some sort of wordless back-to-back communion. A glistening gelatinous orb floated beside them. Someone else (Evans, that was it) seized a nearby hand tool and lobbed it to starboard. It spun lazily end over end until Chodorowska reached up and snatched it from the air, without ever taking her eyes off the component in her other hand. 
    She’d never even looked. Which was not to say she hadn’t seen it coming.
    But of course there was no her. Not right now, anyway. There was no Evans or Ofoegbu either.
    There was only the hive.
    How had Moore put it? Cognitive subspecies. But the Colonel didn’t get it. Neither did Lianna; she’d shared her enthusiastic blindness with Brüks over breakfast that very morning, ticked off in hushed and reverent tones the snips and splices that had so improved her masters: No TPN suppression, no Semmelweis reflex. They’re immune to inattentional blindness and hyperbolic discounting, and Oldschool, that synesthesia of theirs—they reset millions of years of sensory biases with that trick. Randomized all the errors, just like that. And it’s not just the mundane sensory stuff, it’s not just feeling color and tasting sounds. They can literally see time…
    As if those were good things.
    In a way, of course, they were. All those gut feelings, right or wrong, that had kept the breed alive on the Pleistocene savannah—and they were wrong, so much of the time. False negatives, false positives, the moral algebra of fat men pushed in front of onrushing trolleys. The strident emotional belief that children made you happy, even when all the data pointed to misery. The high-amplitude fear of sharks and dark-skinned snipers who would never kill you; indifference to all the toxins and pesticides that could. The mind was so rotten with misrepresentation that in some cases it literally had to be damaged before it could make a truly rational decision—and should some brain-lesioned mother abandon her baby in a burning house in order to save two strangers from the same fire, the rest of the world would be more likely to call her a monster than laud the rationality of her lifeboat ethics. Hell, rationality itself—the exalted Human ability to reason—hadn’t evolved in the pursuit of truth but simply to win arguments, to gain control: to bend others, by means logical or sophistic, to your will. 
    Truth had never been a priority. If believing a lie kept the genes proliferating, the system would believe that lie with all its heart.
    Fossil feelings. Better off without them, once you’d outgrown the savannah and decided that Truth mattered after all. But Humanity wasn’t defined by arms and legs and upright posture. Humanity had evolved at the synapse as well as at the opposable thumb—and those misleading gut feelings were the very groundwork on which the whole damn clade had been built. Capuchins felt empathy. Chimps had an innate sense of fair play. You could look into the eyes of any cat or dog and see a connection there, a legacy of common subroutines and shared emotions. 
    The Bicamerals had cut away all that kinship in the name of something their stunted progenitors called Truth, and replaced it with—something else. They might look human. Their cellular metabolism might lie dead on the Kleiber curve. But to merely call them a cognitive subspecies was denial to the point of delusion. The wiring in those skulls wasn’t even mammalian anymore. A look into those sparkling eyes would show you nothing but—
    “Hey.”
    Lianna’s reflection bobbed upside down next to his in the window. He turned as she reached past and unhooked her pressure suit from its alcove. “Hey.”
    His eyes wandered back to the window. The back-to-back Bicamerals had ended their joint trance; they turned, simultaneously plunged their hands into the wobbling sphere at their side (Water, Brüks realized: it’s just a blob of water), dried off on a towel leashed to the bulkhead.
    “I didn’t know,” he said, too quietly. As if afraid they’d hear him through the bulkhead. “How they work. What they—are.”
    “Really.” She checked her suit O2. “I would’ve thought the eyes’d be a giveaway.”
    “I just assumed that was for night vision. Hell, I know people who retro fluorescent proteins as a fashion statement.”
    “Yeah, now. Back in the day they were—”
    “Diagnostic markers. I figured it out.” After Moore had inspired him to go back and actually look at the thing that had left all those corpses twisted like so much driftwood in the Oregon desert. It still lingered in his own blood, after all—and it had been almost too easy, the way the lab had taken that chimera apart and spread-eagled every piece for his edification. Streptococcal subroutines lifted from necrotizing myelitis; viral encephalitides laterally promoted from their usual supporting role in limbic encephalitis; a polysaccharide in the cell wall with a special affinity for the nasal mucosa. A handful of synthetic subroutines, built entirely from scratch, to glue all those incompatible pieces together and keep them from fighting.
    But it had been the heart of that piecemeal bug that had betrayed the hive to Brüks’s investigations: a subroutine targeting a specific mutation of the p53 gene. He hadn’t got any direct hits when he’d run a search on that mutation, but the nearest miss was close enough to spill the secret: a tumor antagonist patented almost thirty years before.
    As if someone had weaponized an anticancer agent.
    “Doesn’t it bother you?” he wondered now.
    The suit had swallowed her to the waist. “Why should it?”
    “They’re tumors, Lee. Literally. Thinking tumors.”
    “That’s a pretty gross oversimplification.”
    “Maybe.” He wasn’t clear on the details. Hypomethylation, CpG islands, methylcytosine—black magic, all of it. The precise and deliberate rape of certain methylating groups to turn interneurons cancerous, just so: a synaptic superbloom that multiplied every circuit a thousandfold. It was no joyful baptism, as far as Brüks could tell. There’d be no ecstasy in that rebirth. It was a breakneck overgrowth of weedy electricity that nearly killed its initiates outright, pulled sixty-million-year-old circuits out by the roots. 
    Lianna was right: the path was subtle and complex beyond human imagining, controlled with molecular precision, tamed by whatever drugs and dark arts the Bicamerals used to keep all that overgrowth from running rampant. But when the rites and incantations had been spoken, when the deed had been done and the patient sewn up, it all came down to one thing:
    They’d turned their brains into cancer.
    “I was so worked up about Luckett.” Brüks shook his head at his own stupidity. “We just left him back there to die, you know, we left all of them—but he would have died anyway, wouldn’t he? As soon as he graduated. Every pathway that ever made him what he was, the cancer would eat it all and replace it with something…”
    “Something better,” Lianna said.
    “That’s a matter of opinion.” 
    “You make it sound so horrible.” Wrist seals. Click click. “But you know, you went through pretty much the same thing yourself and you don’t seem any the worse for it.”
    He imagined coming apart. He imagined every thread of conscious experience fraying and dissolving and being eaten away. He imagined dying, while the body lived on.
    “I don’t think so,” he said.
    “Sure. When you were a baby.” She laid a gloved hand on his shoulder. “We all start out with heads full of random mush; it’s the neural pruning afterward that shapes who we are. It’s like, like sculpture. You start with a block of granite, chip away the bits that don’t belong, end up with a work of art. The Bicams just start over with a bigger block.”
    “But it’s not you.”
    “Enough of it is.” She plucked her helmet out of the air.
    “Sure, the memories stick.” Some elements were spared: in the thalamus and cerebellum, hippocampus and brain stem all left carefully unscathed by a holocaust with the most discriminating taste. “But something else is remembering them.”
    “Dan, you gotta let go of this whole self thing. Identity changes by the second, you turn into someone else every time a new thought rewires your brain. You’re already a different person than you were ten minutes ago.” She lowered the helmet over her head, yanked it counterclockwise until it clicked into place. His fish-eye reflection slid bulging across her faceplate as she turned.
    “What about you, Lianna?” he asked softly.
    “What about me?” Her voice muffled and breathy across the glass.
    “You aspiring to the same fate?”
    She eyed him sadly from the bowl of her helmet. “It’s not like you think. Really.” And passed on to some farther shore.
     <tepi>The intuitive mind is a sacred gift and the rational mind is a faithful servant. We have created a society that honors the servant and has forgotten the gift. 
     <teps>—Albert Einstein
    
    Look, Brüks wanted to say: fifty thousand years ago there were these three guys spread out across the plain, and they each heard something rustling in the grass. The first one thought it was a tiger, and he ran like hell, and it was a tiger but the guy got away. The second one thought the rustling was a tiger, and he ran like hell, but it was only the wind and his friends all laughed at him for being such a chickenshit. But the third guy, he thought it was only the wind, so he shrugged it off and a tiger had him for dinner. And the same thing happened a million times across ten thousand generations—and after a while everyone was seeing tigers in the grass even when there weren’t any tigers, because even chickenshits have more kids than corpses do. And from those humble beginnings we learned to see faces in the clouds and portents in the stars, to see agency in randomness, because natural selection favors the paranoid. Even here in the twenty-first century you can make people more honest just by scribbling a pair of eyes on the wall with a Sharpie. Even now, we are wired to believe that unseen things are watching us.
    And it came to pass that certain people figured out how to use that. They painted their faces or they wore funny hats, they shook their rattles and waved their crosses and they said, Yes, there are tigers in the grass, there are faces in the sky, and they will be very angry if you do not obey their commandments. You must make offerings to appease them, you must bring grain and gold and altar boys for our delectation or they will strike you down and send you to the Awful Place. And people believed them by the billions, because after all, they could see the invisible tigers.
    And you’re a smart kid, Lianna. You’re a bright kid and I like you but some day you’ve got to grow up and realize that it’s all a trick. It’s all just eyes scribbled on the wall, to make you think there’s something looking back. 
    That’s what Brüks wanted to say. And Lianna would listen, and ponder this new information, and she would come to see the wisdom of his argument. She would change her mind.
    The only problem with this scenario was that it rapidly became obvious that she already knew all that stuff, and believed in invisible tigers anyway. It drove him up the fucking wall.
    “That’s not God,” she said one morning in the Commons, wide eyed with astonishment that he could have made such a stupid mistake. “That’s just a bunch of ritualistic junk that got stuck onto God by people who wanted to hijack the agenda.”
    A derisive snort from over by the galley dispenser. “Between you two arguing about ghosts and Carnage stringing out on rotten bits”—Sengupta grabbed her breakfast and headed for the ladder—“I don’t think I can handle five more minutes of this shit.” 
    Brüks watched her go, turned his attention to a bulkhead window Lianna had opened into the Hold: shadows, machine parts, weightless bodies drawing dismembered components together into tangled floating jigsaws. Binary stars, sparkling in the gloom.
     “If it’s junk, why do they keep doing it?” He jerked his thumb at the display. “Why can’t those guys go thirty minutes without doing that hand-washing thing of theirs?”
    “Hand-washing reduces doubt and second-guessing in the wake of making a decision,” Lianna told him. “Brains tend to take metaphors literally.”
    “Bullshit.”
    Her eyes defocused for an instant. “I’ve just sent you the citation. Of course an actual tweak would be more efficient—I bet they do that too, actually—but I think they like to remember where they came from. You’d be surprised how much folklore has survival value when you rip it up and look at the roots.”
    “I never said religious beliefs weren’t adaptive. That doesn’t make them true.” Brüks spread his hands, palms up.
    “What do you think vision is?” she asked him. “You don’t see a fraction of the things that surround you, and at least half the things you do see are wrong. Hell, color doesn’t even exist outside your own head. Vision’s just plain wrong; it only persists because it works. If you’re going to dismiss the idea of God, you better stop believing your own eyes in the bargain.” 
    “My eyes never told me to murder anyone who doesn’t share my worldview.”
    “My God never told me to do that either.”
    “Lots of people’s Gods have.” 
    “Riiight. And we’re just gonna ignore all those racist assholes who quoted Darwin to justify turning people into slaves? Or wiping them out altogether?” He opened his mouth; she preempted him with a raised hand: “Let’s just agree that neither side has a monopoly on assholes. The point is, once you recognize that every human model of reality is fundamentally unreal, then it all just comes down to which one works best. And science has had a damn good run, no question. But the sun is setting on the Age of Empiricism.”
    He snorted. “The Age of Empiricism is just getting started.” 
    “Come on, Oldschool. We’re long past the days when all you had to do was clock a falling apple or compare beak length in finches. Science has been running into limits ever since it started trying to get Schrödinger’s cat to play with balls of invisible string. Go down a few orders of mag and everything’s untestable conjecture again. Math and philosophy. You know as well as I do that reality has a substructure. Science can’t go there.”
    “Nothing can. Faith may claim—”
    “Knot theory,” Lianna said. “Invented it for the sheer beauty of the artifact. We didn’t have particle accelerators back then; we had no evidence at all that it would turn out to describe subatomic physics a century or two down the road. Pre-Socratic Greeks intuited atomic theory in two hundred B.C. Buddhists were saying centuries ago that we can’t trust our senses, that sensation itself is an act of faith. Hinduism’s predicated on the Self as illusion: no NMRs a thousand years ago, no voxel readers. No evidence. And damned if I can see the adaptive advantage of not believing in your own existence; but neurologically it happens to be true.”
    She beamed at him with the beatific glow of the true convert. “There’s an intuition, Dan. It’s capricious, it’s unreliable, it’s corruptible—but it’s so powerful when it works, and it’s no coincidence that it ties into the same parts of the brain that give you the rapture. The Bicamerals harnessed it. They amped the temporal and they rewired the parietals—”
    “You mean ripped them out completely.”  
    “—and they had to leave conventional language back in the dust, but they figured it out. Their religion, for want of a better word, goes places science can’t. Science backs it up, as far as science can go; there’s no reason to believe it doesn’t keep right on working after it leaves science behind.”
    “You mean you have faith it keeps working,” Brüks observed drily. 
    “Do you measure Earth’s gravity every time you step outside? Do you reinvent quantum circuits from scratch whenever you boot up, just in case the other guys missed something?” She gave him a moment to answer. “Science depends on faith,” she continued, when he didn’t. “Faith that the rules haven’t changed, faith that the other guys got the measurements right. All science ever did was measure a teensy sliver of the universe and assume that everything else behaved the same way. But the whole exercise falls apart if the universe doesn’t follow consistent laws. How do you test if that’s true?”
    “If two experiments yield different results—”
    “Happens all the time, my friend. And when it does, every good scientist discounts those results because they failed to replicate. One of the experiments must have been flawed. Or they both were. Or there’s some unknown variable that’ll make everything balance out just as soon as we discover what it is. The idea that physics itself might be inconsistent? Even if you considered the possibility in your wildest dreams, how could you test for it when the scientific method only works in a consistent universe?”
    He tried to think of an answer.
    “We’ve always thought c and friends ruled supreme, right out to the quasars and beyond,” Lianna mused. “What if they’re just—you know, some kind of local ordinance? What if they’re a bug? Anyway”—she fed her plate into the recycler—“I gotta go. We’re test-firing the chamber today.”
    “Look, science—” He marshaled his thoughts, unwilling to let it go. “It’s not just that it works. We know how it works. There’s no secret to it. It makes sense.” 
    She wasn’t looking at him. Brüks followed her eyes to the bulkhead feed. They all seemed more or less mended by now—Chinedum, Amratu, a handful of other demigods who’d never be more than names and ciphers to him—although the pressure still kept them captive for the moment. Still insufficiently omnipotent to speed the physics of decompression. It was a small comfort.
    “Those guys do not make sense,” he continued. “They roll around on the floor and ululate and you write up the patent applications. We don’t know how it works, we don’t know if it’s going to keep working, it could stop working at any moment. Science is more than magic and rituals—”
    He stopped.
    Ululations. Incantations. Hive harmonics.
    Rituals.
    These feeds have motion cap, he remembered. 
    
    <#>
    
    Colonel Jim Moore crouched sideways against the Commons wall like a monstrous grasshopper: legs folded tight at the knees, spring-loaded and ready to pop; thorax folded over them like a protective carapace; one hand dancing with some unseen ConSensus interface while the other, wrapped around a convenient cargo strap, held body to bulkhead. His eyes jiggled and danced beneath closed lids: blind to this impoverished little shell of a world, immersed in some other denied Daniel Brüks.
    The grasshopper opened its eyes: glazed at first, clearing by degrees.
    “Daniel,” it said dully.
    “You look awful.”
    “I asked for an onboard cosmetics spa before we launched. They went for a lab instead.” 
    “When was the last time you ate?”
    Moore frowned.
    “That does it. I’m buying, you’re eating.” Brüks stepped over to the galley.
    “But—”
    “Unless you think that anorexia’s the best way to prep for an extended field op.”
    Moore hesitated.
    “Come on.” Brüks punched in an order for salmon steak (he was still tickled by the fabber’s proficiency with extinct meats). “Lianna’s back in the hold, and Rakshi’s—being Rakshi. You want me eating with Valerie?”
    “So this is a rescue mission.” Moore unfolded himself onto the deck, relenting at last. 
    “That’s the spirit. What do you want?”
    “Just coffee.”
    Brüks glared at him.
    “Okay, fine. Anything.” The Colonel waved a hand in surrender. “Kruggets. With Tandoori sauce.”
    Brüks winced and relayed the order, tossed a ’bulb of coffee across the compartment (Coriolis turned it into a curveball but Moore caught it anyway with barely a glance), grabbed one for himself and twisted the heat tab en route. He set the wobbly warming sphere onto the table and wound his way back to collect their meals. 
    “Still going over the Theseus data?” He pushed Moore’s fluorescent krill across the table and sat down opposite. 
    “I thought the whole point of this was to get my mind off that.”
    “The point was to get you off your damn hunger strike,” Brüks said. “And to get me something to talk to besides the walls.”
    Moore chewed, swallowed. “Don’t say I didn’t warn you.”
    “Warn me?”
    “I distinctly remember raising the possibility—the likelihood, even—that you might be bored out of your skull.”
    “Believe me, I’m not complaining.”
    “Yes you are.”
    “Maybe a little.” (Why did everything from the galley taste like oil?) “But it’s not so bad. I got ConSensus, I got Lee to try and deprogram. Weigh a little cabin fever against getting stashed with the luggage for the next six months—”
    “Believe me.” Moore smiled faintly. “There are worse things than extended unconsciousness.”
    “For example?”
    Moore didn’t answer.
    The Crown did, though. In an instant she turned half the bulkhead bloody with Intercom alarms.
    SENGUPTA, they screamed.
    
    <#>
    
    Moore commed the Hub while Brüks was still peeling himself off the ceiling. “Rakshi. What—”
    Her words cascaded back, high pitched and panicky: “She’s coming oh shit she’s coming up she knows—” 
    A pit opened in Brüks’s stomach.
    “I’m on to her I think she knows of course she knows she’s a fucking vampire she knows everything—”
    “Rakshi, where—”
    “Listen to me you stupid roach she kil—oh fu—”
    The channel died before she could finish, but it didn’t really matter. You could have heard the screaming halfway to Mars.
    Moore was through the ceiling in an instant. Brüks followed in his wake, a jump up the ladder, a grab for a passing handhold, the endless loop of the conveyor pulling him smoothly along the weight-loss gradient from hab to Hub. Moore had no time for that shit; he shot up the ladder two rungs at a time, then three, then four. He ricocheted free-falling out the top of the spoke before the belt had drawn Brüks even halfway. That was okay. Maybe he’d have everything fixed by the time Brüks made it to the top, maybe Sengupta’s screams of rage would end and calm soothing voices would murmur in their stead, intent on reconciliation...
    Sengupta’s screams ended.
    He tried to ignore the other voices, the ones in his head saying Go back, you idiot. Let Jim handle it, he’s a soldier for chrissakes, what are you gonna do against a goddamn vampire? You’re collateral. You’re lunch.
    That’s right, Backdoor. Just turn around and run away. Again.
    The conveyor, insensitive, drew him forward into battle.
    He emerged into the southern hemisphere, knees shaking. There were no calm voices. There were no voices at all.
    There was no reconciliation.
    The vampire clung one-handed to the grille. Her other hand held Sengupta by the throat, right at eye level, as if the pilot were a paper doll. Valerie looked impassively into her victim’s eyes; Sengupta squirmed and choked and didn’t look back.
    The south pole was a bright gaping pit to stern. Its reflection smeared across the mirrorball like a round toothless mouth. An image flashed across Brüks’s forebrain, courtesy of his hind: Valerie tossing Sengupta into that maw. The Crown of Thorns closing its mouth and chewing.
    Moore edged along the Tropic of Capricorn, feet just above the deck, hands open at his sides.
    “Okay, we can take it from here.”
    Not Moore. Lianna’s voice, ringing calm and clear from the back of the Crown’s throat. A moment later she sailed forth from its maw, fearless, light as air, heading directly for Valerie & Victim.
    What’s wrong with her? “Lianna, don’t—”
    “S’okay.” She spared a glance. “I’ve got it under—”
    And was cut down with the sudden crack of bones snapping under the impact of Valerie’s foot, an obscene and elegant en pointe fired like a piston into Lutterodt’s rib cage. She spun back toward the south pole, a rag doll with no fixed center of gravity; the Crown caught her spine in passing, bent it the wrong way, tossed her back down its throat from whence she’d come.
    Fuck fuck fuck—
    “Let her go,” Moore was saying, his eyes still on Sengupta, calm as death. As though Lianna Lutterodt had never even made an appearance, as though she hadn’t just been swatted like a mosquito. As though she couldn’t possibly be bleeding out against the bulkhead a hundred meters to stern.
    I have to help her.
    Valerie kept eyes on Sengupta, head cocked like a predatory bird sizing up something shiny. “She attacks me.” Her voice was distant, almost distracted: voicemail from a monster with other things on its mind.
    Brüks crept forward, belly against bulkhead: a strut here, a cargo strap there, hand over hand toward the south pole. 
    “She’s no threat.” Moore was behind Valerie now, looking past her shoulder to her prey. The prey croaked softly. “There’s no reason to—”
    “Thank you for your tactical advice.” A faint white smile ghosted across her lips.
    Was that a faint moan sighing up through the Crown’s throat? Still conscious then, maybe. Still hope.
    “Trade,” Valerie said.
    “Yes,” Moore replied, moving forward.
    “Not you.”
    Suddenly Brüks was off the deck and yanked into the  air; suddenly Valerie’s hand was around his throat, gripping him just below the jaw with fingers cold and sinuous as tentacles while a distant irrelevant Rakshi Sengupta bounced off the southern hemisphere, hacking, doubled over. 
    And when Valerie looked at him with that bemused and distant stare, he looked back. He tried not to. Over the slow burning in his lungs, over the casual pain of a larynx compressed just this side of strangulation, he would have given anything to turn away. Somehow he didn’t have the will. He couldn’t even close his eyes against hers.
    Her pupils were bright bloody pinpoints, red stars clenched tight against the light of day. Behind them, the bulkhead rolled past in lazy slow motion.
    The Hub dwindled to the wrong end of a telescope. Sengupta was shouting somewhere, her voice raw and tinny and barely audible over the white noise of distant pounding surf: She killed one of them she killed one of her zombies one of her people he’s not on the board I can’t find him anywhere—
    There was nothing in Valerie's face but that spectral half smile, that look of dispassionate appraisal. She didn’t seem to notice Moore slipping up from behind, or Sengupta screaming headlong back into the fray with claws bared. She didn’t even seem to notice her own left hand flicking back of its own accord to casually slap the pilot into the soldier, all that momentum spun impossibly on the head of a pin and redirected a hundred eighty degrees. Fucking monster fucking monster fucking monster, Sengupta shouted from across an ocean and Brüks could only think: Cats and dogs cats and dogs…
    But none of that mattered. All that mattered were he and Valerie, alone together: the way she let just enough air past her fingers to keep him awake, the way she reached out with her free hand and tapped that light arrhythmic tattoo across his temple; the things she whispered for his ears only, intimate secrets of such vital importance he forgot them even as she breathed them out along his cheek.
    Behind her, Jim Moore grabbed a cargo strap and braced his feet against the wall. Valerie didn’t even bother to keep him in view.
    “Is it true?” he asked quietly.
    “Of course it’s fucking true she’s a vampire she’d kill all of—”
    Moore, eyes locked on Valerie, raised a palm in Sengupta’s direction. Sengupta shut up as if guillotined.
    “You think this matters.” There was distant amusement in Valerie’s voice, as if she’d just seen a rabbit stand up on its hind legs and demand the right to vote.
    “You think so, too,” Moore began. “Or—”
    “—you wouldn’t have reacted,” he and Valerie finished in sync.
    He tried again: “Were they under formal con...” they chorused. He trailed off, an acknowledgment of futility. The vampire even matched his ellipsis without missing a beat.
    Sengupta fumed silently across the compartment, too smart and too damn stupid to be scared. Brüks tried to swallow, gagged as his Adam’s apple caught between the vice of Valerie’s thumb and forefinger.
    “Malawi,” Valerie said quietly, and: “Not mission-critical.”
    Brüks swallowed again. As if there’s anyone on this goddamn ship who’s less mission-critical than me.
    Maybe Moore was thinking it, too. Maybe he decided to act on behalf of Daniel Brüks, the Parasite That Walked Like a Man. Or maybe he just took advantage of his adversary’s distraction, maybe it didn’t have anything to do with Brüks at all. But something—changed subtly, in Moore’s stance. His body seemed looser, somehow, more relaxed, incongruously taller at the same time.
    Valerie was still eye to eye with Brüks, but it didn’t matter. It was obvious from the way her smile widened and cracked, from the tiny click of teeth against teeth: she could see everything that mattered about Moore’s face, reflected in his own.
    She turned, almost lazily, tossed Brüks aside like a cigarette butt. Brüks flailed across the open spine; he barely missed a figure blurring past in the opposite direction. A cargo cube caught him and slapped him back off the deck. He doubled over, coughing, while Moore and Valerie danced in fast-forward. The monster’s arms moved as though spun by a centrifuge; her body rebounded off the deck and shot through empty space where Jim Moore had existed a split-second before.
    “Fhat thouding do’re.”
    Not a shout. Not even an exclamation. It didn’t sound like a command. But those sounds reached into the Hub from the south pole and seemed to physically slap Valerie off target, reach right into the monster’s head and grab her by the motor nerves. She twisted in midair, landed like a jumping spider on the curve of the bulkhead and froze there: eyes bright as halogen, mouth full of gleaming little shark teeth.
    “Juppyu imaké.”
    Moore rose from a defensive crouch, studied hands half raised against blows that hadn’t materialized. Brought them down again.
    Chinedum Ofoegbu rose from the throat of the Crown. 
    You can’t do that, Brüks thought, astonished. You’re stuck in the Hold for another three days. 
    “Prothat blemsto bethe?” Ofoegbu’s hands fluttered like a pianist’s against an invisible keyboard. The light in his eyes slithered like the Aurora Borealis.
    I don’t care how smart you are. You’re still made out of meat. You can’t just step out of a decompression chamber.
    The Bicameral’s blood must be fizzing in its flesh. All those bubbles out on early parole, all those gases freed from the weight of too many atmospheres: all set loose to party it up in the joints and capillaries... 
    One’s all it’ll take, one tiny bubble in the brain. A pinpoint embolism in the right spot and you’re dead, just like that.
    “Your vampire—” Sengupta began, before Moore preempted her with: “We have some mission-critical issues to deal with...”
    But there is no you anymore, is there? You’re just a body part, just a node in a network. Expendable. When the hive cuts you loose, will you get it all back? Will Chinedum Ofoegbu wake up in time to die a roach’s death? Will he change his mind too late, will he have a chance to feel betrayed before he stops feeling anything at all? 	
    Ofoegbu coughed a fine red mist into the room. Blood and stars bubbled in his eyes. He began to fold at the middle.
    Lianna Lutterodt climbed up in his wake, bent in on herself, one arm clenched tight to her side. With the other she reached out, wincing; but her master was too far away. She pushed off the lip of the south pole, floated free, caught him. Every movement took a visible toll. 
    “If you people are through trying to kill each other—” She coughed, tried again— “maybe someone could help me get him back to the Hold before he fucking dies.” 
    
    <#>
    
    “Holy shit,” Brüks said, dropping back into Commons. The node was back with its network. Lianna was meshed and casted and had retreated to her rack while her broken parts stitched themselves back together.
    Moore had already cracked open the scotch. He held out a glass.
    Brüks almost giggled. “Are you kidding? Now?”
    The Colonel glanced at the other man’s hands: they trembled. “Now.”
    Brüks took the tumbler, emptied it. Moore refilled without asking.
    “This can’t go on,” Brüks said.
    “It won’t. It didn’t.”
    “So Chinedum stopped her. This time. And it just about killed him.”
    “Chinedum was only the interface, and she knows that. She would have gained nothing and risked everything by attacking him.”
    “What if she’d pulled that shit a few days ago? What if she pulls it again?” He shook his head. “Lee could have been killed. It was just dumb luck that—”
    “We got off lightly,” Moore reminded him. “Compared to some.”
    Brüks fell silent. She killed one of her zombies.
    “Why did she do it?” he asked after a moment. “Food? Fun?”
    “It’s a problem,” the Colonel admitted. “Of course it’s a problem.”
    “Can’t we do anything?”
    “Not at the moment.” He took a breath. “Technically, Sengupta did attack first.”
    “Because Valerie killed someone!”
    “We don’t know that. And even if she did, there are—jurisdictional issues. She may have been within her rights, legally. Anyway, it doesn’t matter.”
    Brüks stared, speechless. 
    “We’re a hundred million klicks from the nearest legitimate authority,” Moore reminded him. “Any that might happen by wouldn’t look more kindly on us than on Valerie. Legalities are irrelevant out here; we just have to play the hand we’re dealt. Fortunately we’re not entirely on our own. The Bicamerals are at least as smart and capable as she is, if not smarter.”
    “I’m not worried about their capabilities. I don’t trust them.”
    “Do you trust me?” Moore asked unexpectedly.
    Brüks considered a moment. “Yes.”
    The Colonel inclined his head. “Then trust them.”
    “I trust your intentions,” Brüks amended softly.
    “Ah. I see.”
    “You’re too close to them, Jim.”
    “No closer than you’ve been, lately.”
    “They had their hooks into you way before I joined the party. You and Lianna, the way you just—accept everything...”
    Moore said nothing.
    Brüks tried again. “Look, don’t get me wrong. You went up against a vampire for us, and you could’ve been killed, and I know that. I’m grateful. But we got lucky, Jim: you’re usually wrapped up in that little ConSensus shell you’ve built for yourself, and if Valerie had chosen any other time to torque out—”
    “I’m wrapped up in that shell,” Moore said levelly, “dealing with a potential threat to the whole—”
    “Uh-huh. And how many new insights have you gained, squeezing the same signals over and over again since we broke orbit?”
    “I’m sorry if that leaves you feeling vulnerable. But your fears are unfounded. And in any case”—Moore swallowed his own dram—“planetary security has to take priority.”
    “This isn’t about planetary security,” Brüks said.
    “Of course it is.”
    “Bullshit. It’s about your son.”
    Moore blinked.
    “Siri Keeton, synthesist on the Theseus mission,” Brüks continued, more gently. “It’s not as though the crew roster was any kind of secret.”
    “So.” Moore’s voice was glassy and expressionless. “You’re not as completely self-absorbed as you appear.”
    “I’ll take that as a compliment,” Brüks tried.
    “Don’t. The presence of my son on that mission doesn’t change the facts on the ground. We’re dealing with agents of unknown origin and vastly superior technology. It is my job—”
    “And you’re doing that job with a brain that still runs on love and kin selection and all those other Stone Age things we seem hell-bent on cutting out of the equation. That would be enough to tear anyone apart, but it’s even harder for you, isn’t it? Because one of those facts on the ground is that you’re the reason he was out there in the first place.”
    “He’s out there because he’s the most qualified for the mission. Full stop. Anyone in my place would have made the same decision.”
    “Sure. But we both know why he was the most qualified.”
    Moore’s face turned to granite.
    “He was most qualified,” Brüks continued, “because he got certain augments during childhood. And he got those augments because you chose a certain line of work with certain risks, and one day some asshole with a grudge and a splicer kit took a shot at you and hit him instead. You think it’s your fault that some Realist fuckwit missed the target. You blame yourself for what happened to your son. It’s what parents do.”
    “And you know all about being a parent.”
    “I know about being Human, Jim. I know what people tell themselves. You made Siri the man for the job before he was even born, and when the Fireflies dropped in you had to put him at the top of the list and ship him out and now all you’ve got is those goddamned signals, that’s your last link and I understand, man. It’s natural, it’s Human, it’s, it’s inevitable because you and I, we haven’t got around to cutting those parts out of us yet. But just about everyone else around here has, and we can’t afford to ignore that. We can’t afford to be—distracted. Not here, not now.”
    He held out his glass, and felt a vague and distant kind of relief at how steady his hand was around the crystal. Colonel Jim Moore regarded it for a moment. Looked back at the half-empty bottle.
    “Bar’s closed,” he said.
    
   
   
   
   
   <ct>Prey


       
      <epi>Of greater concern are the smaller networks pioneered by the so-called Bicameral Order, which—while having shown no interest in any sort of military or political activism—remain susceptible to weaponization.  Although this faction shares tenuous historical kinship with the Dharmic religions behind the Moksha Mind, they do not appear to be pursuing that group’s explicit goal of self-annihilation; each Bicameral hive is small enough (hence, of sufficiently low latency) to sustain a coherent sense of conscious self-awareness. This would tend to restrict their combat effectiveness both in terms of response-latency and effective size. However, the organic nature of Bicameral MHIs leaves them less susceptible to the signal-jamming countermeasures that bedevil hard-tech networks. From the standpoint of brute military force, therefore, the Bicamerals probably represent the greatest weaponization potential amongst the world’s extant mind hives. This is especially troubling in light of the number of technological and scientific advances attributable to the Order in recent years, many of which have already proven destabilizing. 
      
      <eps>—Moore, J. 12/03/2088: 
      Hive Minds, Mind Hives, and Biological Military Automata: 
      The Role of Collective Intelligence in Offline Combat. J. Mil. Tech. 68(14)
    
     
     <epi>Behold, I stand at the door and knock. 
     <eps>—Revelation 3:20

    A sun grown huge. A shadow on its face. A fleck, then a freckle: a dot, a disk, a hole. Smaller than a sunspot—darker, more symmetrical—and then larger. It grew like a perfect tumor, a black planetary disk where no planet could be, swelling across the photosphere like a ravenous singularity. A sun that covered half the void: a void that covered half the sun. Some critical, razor-thin instant passed and foreground and background had switched places, the sun no longer a disk but a brilliant golden iris receding around a great dilating pupil. Now it was less than that, a fiery hoop around a perfect starless hole; now a circular thread, writhing, incandescent, impossibly fine.
    Gone.
    A million stars winked back into the firmament, cold dimensionless pinpricks strewn in bands and random handfuls across half the sky. But the other half remained without form and void—and now the tumor that had swallowed the sun was gnawing outward at the stars as well. Brüks looked away from that great maw and saw a black finger lancing through the starfield directly to port: a dark spire, five hundred kilometers long, buried deep in the shade. Brüks downshifted his personal spectrum a few angstroms and it glowed red as an ember, an infrared blackbody rising from the exact center of the disk ahead. Heat radiator. A hairbreadth from the center of the solar system, it never saw the sun.
    He tugged nervously at the webbing holding him to the mirrorball. Sengupta was strapped into her usual couch on his left, Lianna to his right, Moore to hers. The old warrior had barely said a word to him since Brüks had broached the subject of his son. Some lines were invisible until crossed, apparently.
    Or maybe they were perfectly visible, to anyone who wasn’t an insensitive dolt. Empiricists always kept their minds open to alternative hypotheses.
    He sought refuge in the view outside, dark to naked eyes but alive on tactical. Icons, momentum vectors, trajectories. A thin hoop of pale emerald shrank across the forward view, drawing tight around the Crown’s nose: the rim of her reflective parasol—erased from ConSensus in deference to an uninterrupted view—redundant now, spooling tight into stowage. The habs had already been folded back and tied down for docking. Beyond the overlays the Crown fell silently past massive structures visible only in their absence: shadows against the sky, the starless silhouettes of gantries and droplet-conveyors, endless invisible antennae belied by the intermittent winking of pilot lights strung along their lengths.
    The Crown bucked. Thrusters flared like the sparks of arc welders in the darkness ahead. Down returned, dead forward. Brüks fell gently from the couch into the elastic embrace of his harness, hung there while the Crown’s incandescent brakes gave dim form to the face of a distant cliff: girders, the cold dead cones of dormant thrusters, great stratified slabs of polytungsten. Then the sparks died, and down with them. All that distant topography vanished again. The Crown of Thorns continued to fall, gently as thistledown.
    “Looks normal so far,” Moore remarked to no one in particular.
    “Wasn’t there supposed to be some kind of standing guard?” Brüks wondered. There’d been an announcement, anyway, in the weeks after Firefall. While we have seen no evidence of ill will on the part of blah blah blah prudent to be cautious yammer yammer cannot afford to leave such a vital source of energy undefended in the current climate of uncertainty yammer blah.
    Moore said nothing. After a moment Lianna took up the slack: “The place is almost impossible to see in the glare unless you know where to look. And there’s nothing like a bunch of big obvious heatprints going back and forth for telling the other guys where to look.”
    It was as much as she’d said—to Brüks, at least—since Valerie had flexed her claws in the Hub. He took it as a good sign.
    More sparks, tweaking the night in split-second bursts. Wireframes crawled all over tactical now, highlighting structures the naked eye could barely discern even as shadows. Constellations ignited on the cliff ahead, lights triggered by the presence of approaching mass, dim and elegant as the photophores of deep-sea fish. Candles in the window to guide travelers home. They rippled and flowed and converged on a monstrous gray lamprey uncoiling from the landscape beneath. Its great round mouth pulsed and puckered and closed off the port bow.
    One final burst of counterthrust. The lamprey flinched, recoiled a meter or two, resumed its approach. The Crown was barely moving now. The lamprey closed on the port flank and attached itself to the docking hatch.
    “We are down to fumes felching Bicams better know what they’re doing because even our chemical just ran dry,” Sengupta reported. “You want this ship to go anywhere now you gotta get out and push.”
    “Not a problem,” Moore said. “We’re sitting on the biggest charger in the solar system.”
    Lianna looked at Brüks and tried to smile.
    “Welcome to Icarus.”
    
    <#>
    
    Of course, no one was going to fuck on a first date.
    The sky in the Hub began to fill with handshakes and head shots: Icarus and the Crown introducing each other, coming to terms, agreeing that this little rendezvous was an intimate affair that really didn’t warrant the involvement of Earthbound engineers. Sengupta whispered sweet nothings to the station’s onboard, coaxed it into turning on the lights, booting up life-support, maybe sharing a few pages from its diary.
    Naked bodies floated up from the lower hemisphere. Eulali and one of the other Bicamerals (Haina, Brüks thought), purged of hostile microbes and decompressed at last, slumming it with the baselines. Nobody seemed to think it worthy of comment. 
    “No one since the last on-site op check.” Sengupta jabbed one finger at a window full of alphanumeric gibberish. “Nobody came or went any time in the last eighteen months. Boosters fired a hundred ninety-two days ago to stabilize the orbit but nothing else.”
    Sudden swift movement from the corners of both eyes: the undead in formation, shooting single-file through the hatch like raptors diving for a kill. They bounced off the sky, swung around the forward ladder, disappeared through the ceiling fast and fluid as barracuda.
    So much for the pack, Brüks thought nervously. What about the Alph—and didn’t finish the question, because the flesh crawling up his backbone had just given him the answer.
    She was right behind him. For all he knew, she always had been.
    The Bicamerals didn’t seem to notice. They hadn’t taken their eyes off tactical since they’d arrived. Brüks swallowed and forced his gaze left. He forced himself to turn. He resisted the urge to lower his gaze as Valerie came into view, forced himself to look her right in the eyes. They shone back at him. He gritted his teeth and thought very hard about leucophores and thin-film optics and finally realized: She’s not even looking at me.
    She wasn’t. Those bright monster eyes burned a path right past him to the dome behind, shifted and jiggled in microscopic increments to this datum or that image, jittered fast as the eyes of zombies and with twice the intensity. Brüks could almost see the brain sparking behind those lenses, the sheets of electricity soaking up information faster than fiber. It had all of them now, monks and monsters and minions alike, all of them finally brought together under a tiny metal sky crowded with the machinery of thought: boot sequences, diagnostics, the sprawling multidimensional vistas of a thousand mechanical senses. It threatened to overflow the hemisphere entirely, a ceaseless flickering infostorm that breached the equator and started spilling aft as Brüks watched.
    Crude as papyrus, he realized. All these dimensions, squashed flat and pasted across physical space: it was a medium for cavemen and cockroaches, not these cognitive giants looming on all sides. Why were they even here? Why come together in the land of the blind when ConSensus went on forever, arrayed endless intelligence throughout the infinite space within their own heads? Why settle for eyes of jelly when invisible signals could reach through bone and brain and doodle on the very synapses themsel—
    Shit, he thought.
    All that smart paint, so ubiquitous throughout the ship. He’d just assumed it was for ambient lighting, and a backup for backups should the implants fail in one of these overclocked brains. But now it seemed to be their preferred interface: crude, pointillist, extrinsic. Not completely unhackable, perhaps—but at least any intrusions would take place outside the head, would compromise the mech and not the meat. At least no alien, imagined or otherwise, would be rewriting the thoughts in the heads of the hive. 
    A few years to settle in, Moore had said. A few years for parties unknown to study new and unfamiliar technology, to infer the nature of the softer things behind it. Years to build whatever gears and interfaces an unlimited energy source could provide, and sit back, and wait for the owners to arrive. All that time for anything in there to figure out how to get in here.
    They’re afraid, Brüks realized, and then: 
    Shit, they’re afraid?
    Sengupta threw a row of camera feeds across the dome. Holds and service crawlways, mainly: tanks for the storage of programmable matter, warrens of tunnels where robots on rails slid along on endless missions of repair and resupply. Habs embedded here and there like lymph nodes, vacuoles to be grudgingly pumped full of warmth and atmosphere on those rare occasions when visitors came calling—but barren, uninviting, barely big enough to stand erect even if gravity had been an option. Icarus was an ungracious host, resentful of any parasites that sought to take up residence in her gut.
    Something had done that anyway.
    Sengupta grabbed that window and stretched it across a fifth of the dome: AUX/RECOMP according to the feed, a cylindrical compartment with another cylinder—segmented, ribbed, studded with conduits and access panels and eruptions of high-voltage cabling—running through its center like a metal trachea. The view brightened as they watched. Fitful sparks ignited along the walls, caught steady, dimmed to a soft lemon glow that spread across painted strips of bulkhead. Wisps of frozen vapor swirled in weightless arabesques before some reawakened ventilator sucked them away. 
    Brüks had educated himself on the way down. He knew what he’d find if he were to cut that massive windpipe down the middle. At one end a great black compound eye, a honeycomb cluster of gamma-ray lasers aimed along the lumen of the tube. Pumps and field coils encircled that space at regular intervals: superconductors, ultrarefrigeration pipes to bring some hypothetical vacuum down to a hairbreadth of absolute zero. Matter took on strange forms inside that chamber. Atoms would lie down, forget about Brown and entropy, take a message from the second law of thermodynamics and promise to get back to it later. They would line up head to toe and lock into place as a single uniform substrate. A trillion atoms would condense into one vast entity: a blank slate, waiting for energy and information to turn it into something new.
    Theseus had fed from something a lot like this, part of the same circuit in fact. Maybe it was feeding still. And down at the far end of AUX/RECOMP, past the lasers and the magnets and the microchannel plate traps, Brüks could see something else, something—
    Wrong.
    That was all he could tell, at first: something just a little bit off about the far end of the compiler. It took a few moments to notice the service port just slightly ajar, the stain leaking from its edges. His brain shuffled through a thousand cue cards and tried spilled paint on for size, but that didn’t really fit. It looked too thick, too blobby for the smart stuff; and he’d seen no other surface painted that oily shade of gray on any of the other feeds.
    Then someone zoomed the view and a whole new set of cues clicked into place.
    Those branching, filigreed edges: like rootlets, like dendrites growing along the machinery.
    “Is it still coming through?” Lianna’s voice, a little dazed.
    “Don’t be stupid you don’t think I’d mention it if it was? Wouldn’t work anyway some idiot left the port open.”
    But life support had been shut down until the Crown had docked, Brüks remembered. Vacuum throughout. “Maybe it was running until you pressurized the habs. Maybe we—interrupted it.”
    Those little pimply lumps, like—like some kind of early-stage fruiting bodies...
    “I told you I’d mention it Jesus the logs say no juice for weeks.”
    “Assuming we can trust the logs,” Moore said softly.
    “It looks almost like dumb paint of some kind,” Lianna remarked.
    Brüks shook his head. “Looks like a slime mold.”
    “Whatever it is,” Moore said, “it’s not something any of our people would have sent down. Which raises an obvious question.”
    It did. But nobody asked it.
    
    <#>
    
    Of course, no slime mold could survive in hard vacuum at absolute zero.
    “Name one thing that can,” Moore said.
    “Deinococcus comes close. Some of the synthetics come closer.”
    “But active?”
    “No,” Brüks admitted. “They pretty much shut down until conditions improve.”
    “So whatever that is”—Moore gestured at the image—“you’re saying it’s dormant.”
    Stranger even than the thing in the window: the experience of being asked for an opinion by anyone on the Crown of Thorns. The mystery lasted long enough for Brüks to glance sideways and see monks and vampire clustered in a multimodal dialogue of clicks and phonemes and dancing fingers. The Bicamerals faced away from each other; they hovered in an impromptu knot, each set of eyes aimed out along a different bearing.
    Jim may be Colonel Supersoldier to me, Brüks realized, but we’re all just capuchins next to those things...
    “I said—”
    “Sorry.” Brüks shook his head. “No, I’m not saying that. I mean, look at it: it’s outside the chamber, part of it anyway. You tell me if there’s some way for that machine to assemble matter off the condenser plate.”
    “So it must have—grown.”
    “That’s the logical conclusion.”
    “In hard vacuum, near absolute zero.”
    “Maybe not so logical. I don’t have another answer.” Brüks jerked his chin toward the giants. “Maybe they do.”
    “It escaped.”
    “If that’s what you want to call it. Not that it got very far.” The stain—or slime mold, or whatever it was—spread less than two meters from the open port before petering out in a bifurcation of rootlets.  Of course, it shouldn’t have even been able to do that much. 
    The damn thing looked alive. As much as Brüks kept telling himself not to jump to conclusions, not to judge alien apparitions by earthly appearance, the biologist was too deeply rooted in him. He looked at that grainy overblown image and he didn’t see any random collection of molecules, didn’t even see an exotic crystal growing along some predestined lattice of alignment. He saw something organic—something that couldn’t have just coalesced from a diffuse cloud of atoms.
    He turned to Moore. “You’re sure Icarus’s telematter technology isn’t just a wee bit more advanced than you let on? Maybe closer to actual fabbing? Because that looks a lot like complex macrostructure to me.”
    Moore turned away and fixed Sengupta with a stare: “Did it—break out? Force open the port?”
    She shook her head and kept her eyes on the ceiling. “No signs of stress or metal fatigue nothing popped nothing broken no bits floating around. Just looks like someone ran a standard diagnostic took out the sample forgot to close the door.”
    “Pretty dumb mistake,” Brüks remarked.
    “Cockroaches make dumb mistakes all the time.”
    And one of the biggest, Brüks did not say, was building you lot.
    “’Course there’s only so much you can see with a camera you gotta go in there and check to be sure.”
    Up on the sky, the slime mold beckoned with a million filigreed fingers.
    “So that’s the next step, right?” Brüks guessed. “We board?”
    A grunted staccato from Eulali, with fingertip accompaniment. From any other primate it might have sounded like a laugh. The node spared him a look and returned her attention to the dome.
    It wasn’t English. Brüks supposed it wasn’t even language, not the way he’d define it at least. But somehow he knew exactly what Eulali had meant.
    You first.
    
    <#>
    
    
    Two hours later four of the Bicamerals and a couple of Valerie’s zombies were on the hull crawling forward along the Crown’s spine with a retinue of maintenance spiders, hauling torches and lasers and wrenches behind them. Two hours to start making half a ship whole again.
    Three days to screw up the courage to go anywhere else.
    Oh, they laid the groundwork. Sengupta did cam-by-cams of the whole frozen array, hijacked a couple of maintenance bots and sent them through every accessible corner and cranny. Brüks couldn’t make out any angels on the feeds. No asteroids either, for that matter. He was starting to wonder if that code-name hadn’t been a red herring—a phrase set loose across the ether so pursuers wouldn’t think twice when the Crown relit her engines halfway through the innersys and accelerated away to some farther destination.
    Squinting as hard as she could, all Sengupta could see was a small dark suspicion that disappeared when you laid an error bar across it: “Station allometry’s off by a few millimeters but it’d be weirder if you didn’t get shrinkage and expansion with all the heat flux.” The hive huddled together  and passed occasional instructions through Lianna: Bring the condenser up to twenty atmospheres. Freeze the chamber. Heat the chamber. Turn out the lights. Turn them on again. Vent the condenser back to vacuum. Here, fab this SEM and bot it over.
    The elephant in the room refused to rise to any flavor of bait. After three days, Brüks was itching for action.
    “They want you to stay here,” Lianna said apologetically. “For your own safety.”
    They floated in the attic, the Crown’s viscera hissing and gurgling about them as a procession of Bicamerals climbed into spacesuits at the main airlock. A globe of water, held together by surface tension, wobbled in midair just off the beaten path. The soft light spilling from the lamprey’s mouth washed everything in robin’s egg.
    “Now they’re interested in my safety.”
    She sighed. “We’ve been over this, Dan.”
    Valerie emerged from the Hub and bared her teeth as she sailed past. Her fingers trailed along a bundle of coolant pipes, lightly tapping an arrhythmic tattoo. Brüks glanced at Lianna; Lianna glanced away. Up the attic, Ofoegbu plunged his hands into the water; pulled them out; rubbed them together before donning his gauntlets. 
    “You’re going, though,” Brüks observed. To work side by side with the creature who had nearly killed her without so much as a glance in her direction. He’d edged around the subject in casual conversation, what little of that there’d been lately. She hadn’t seemed to want to talk about it.
    “It’s my job,” she said now. “But you know, we’re even keeping Jim pretty much in the background.”
    That surprised him. “Really?”
    “We might bring him over once we’re a little more sure of our footing—he was ground control for the Theseus mission, after all—but even then he’ll mostly be remoting in from the Crown. The Bicams don’t want to expose anyone to unnecessary risk. Besides—” She shrugged. “What would you do over there anyway?”
    Brüks shrugged. “Watch. Explore.” Farther up the hall, the blob shuddered afresh as the node called Jaingchu washed away her sins. Why do all the bodies do that, he wondered, if there’s only one mind behind them all?
    “You’ll get better real-time intel back here.” 
    “I guess.” He shook his head. “You’re right, of course. They’re right. I’m just—going a bit stir-crazy in here.”
    “I’d have thought you’d want less excitement in your life. The way things have been going lately, boredom’s something we should be aspiring to.” She managed a smile, laid a hand on his arm. “You’ll be good as there. Looking right over my shoulder.”
    Sengupta grunted from her couch as he drifted back into the Hub. “So they won’t let you out to play.”
    “They will not,” he admitted, and settled in beside her.
    “Better view from here.” One foot tapped absently against the deck. “Wouldn’t wanna be over there anyway, not with that lot can’t even talk to them they got shitty manners in case you hadn’t noticed. Wouldn’t go over there if you paid me.”
    “Thanks,” Brüks said.
    “For what?”
    For trying. For the comforting scritch between the ears.
    Sengupta waved her hand as if spreading a deck of cards: a row of camera windows bloomed left to right across the dome. Gloved hands, visors, the backs of helmets; tactical overlays describing insides and outsides in luminous time-series.
    The lamprey opened its mouth. The Bicameral entourage swam innocently down its throat.
    Brüks pulled on his hood and booted up the motion sensors. 
    
    <#>
    
    He wasn’t entirely useless. They set him to work reseeding the astroturf panels; scraping away the dead brittle stuff that had been sacrificed to cold and vacuum on the way down; spraying fresh nutrigel into the bulkhead planters; spraying, in turn, a mist of microscopic seeds into the gel. The treated surfaces began to green up within the hour, but rather than watch the grass grow he looked on from a distance while Bicams and zombies swarmed across Icarus like army ants, carving great cookie-cutter chunks of polytungsten from its flanks and hauling them back to that jagged gaping stump where the Crown had been torn in two. Eventually they let him outside; the array itself was still off-limits but they let him help out closer to home, tutored him in the use of heavy machinery and set him loose on the Crown’s hull. He torched pins and struts on command, helped shear the parasol free from its mooring at the bow and haul it aft; helped cut precise holes in its center for improvised thrusters that could stare down the heat of ten suns. 
    Other times he sat restlessly in the Hub while Sengupta ran numbers across the wall, this many tonnes and that many kiloNewtons and so much Isp thrust. He’d tap into AUX/RECOMP and watch Valerie and Ofoegbu and Amina at work, scientific and religious paraphernalia floating about their heads as they attempted communion with an impossible slime mold from the stars. He’d capture their movements and their incantations, feed them to a private database he’d been building since before the Crown had docked. Sometimes Jim Moore would be there; other times Brüks would catch him sequestered in some far-off corner of the Crown, adrift on a sea of old telemetry that had nothing to do with his son, nothing at all, just facts on the ground.
    The Colonel was always civil, these days. Never more. 
    When the sight of people in more productive roles failed to satisfy, Brüks abandoned Icarus’s bustling tourist district and went off by himself, cam by cam: stepped through views of empty crawlspaces and frozen habs, an endless dark maze of tunnels connecting the uninhabited and the unexplored. Sometimes there was atmosphere, and frost sparkling on bulkheads. Sometimes there was only vacuum and girders and rails along which prehensile machinery scuttled like platelets in a mechanical bloodstream.
    Once there were stars where no stars should have been: a great hole bitten out of Icarus’s carapace where it would do the least damage. Brüks could see incendiary Bicameral teeth through the gap, brilliant blue pinpoints taking another bite farther down the hull. Even filtered by the camera, they made him squint.
    Next stop.
    Ah. AUX/RECOMP again, more crowded than before: Moore had joined Valerie and the Bicamerals at play.
    Just another roach, Brüks thought. Just like me.
    But you get a seat at the table just the same.
    He watched in silence for a few moments.
    Fuck this.
    
    <#>
    
    Pale blue light spilled into the attic from the open airlock, limned the edges of pipes and lockers and empty alcoves. Brüks sailed through the hatch, grabbed a strut in passing, swung to port and into the glowing mouth of the lamprey itself.
    Eyes hypersaccading in an ebony face, snapping instantly into focus. A body rooted to the airlock wall by one arm, fingers clenched around a convenient handhold. Spring-loaded prosthetics below the knees; they extended absurdly and braced against a bulkhead, blocking Brüks’s way.
    He braked just in time.
    “Restricted access, sir,” the zombie said, eyes dancing once more.
    “Holy shit. You talk.”
    The zombie said nothing.
    “I didn’t think there’d be—anyone in there,” Brüks tried. Nothing. “Are you awake?”
    “No, sir.”
    “So you’re talking in your sleep.”
    Silence. Eyes, jiggling in their sockets.
    I wonder if it knows what happened to the other one. I wonder if it was there...
    “I want to—”
    “You can’t, sir.”
    “Will you—”
    “Yes, sir.”
    —stop me? 
    “Yes but it won’t be necessary,” the zombie added.
    Brüks had been wondering about lethal force. Maybe best not to push that angle.
    On the other hand, the thing didn’t seem to mind answering questions...
    “Why do your ey—”
    “To maximize acquisition of high-res input across the visual field sir.”
    “Huh.” Not a trick the conscious mind could use, with its limited bandwidth. A good chunk of so-called vision actually consisted of preconscious filters deciding what not to see, to spare the homunculus upstream from information overload.
    “You’re black,” Brüks observed. “Most of you zombies are black.”
    No response. 
    “Does Valerie have a melanin feti—”
    “I’ve got this,” Moore said, rising into view through the docking tube. The zombie moved smoothly aside to let him pass.
    “They talk,” Brüks said. “I didn’t—”
    Moore spared a glance at Brüks’s face as he moved past. Then he was back on board, and heading aft. “Come with me, please.” 
    “Uh, where?”
    “R&M. Freckle on your face I don’t like the look of.” Moore disappeared into the Hub.
    Brüks looked back at the airlock. Valerie’s sentry had moved back into place, blocking the way to more exotic locales.
    “Thanks for the chat,” Brüks said. “We’ll have to do it again sometime.”
    
    <#>
    
    “Close your eyes.”
    Brüks obeyed; the insides of his lids glowed brief bloody red as Moore’s diagnostic laser scanned down his face.
    “Word of advice,” the Colonel said from the other side. “Don’t tease the zombies.”
    “I wasn’t teasing him, I was just chat—”
    “Don’t chat with them, either.”
    Brüks opened his eyes. Moore was running his eyes down some invisible midair diagnostic. “Remember who they answer to,” he added.
    “I can’t imagine that Valerie forgot to swear her minions to secrecy.”
    “And I can’t imagine her minions will forget to tell her any secrets you might have asked about. Whether they answered or not.”
    Brüks considered that. “You think she might take offense at the melanin-fetish remark?”
    “I have no idea,” Moore said quietly. “I sure as hell did.”
    Brüks blinked. “I—”
    “You look at them.” There was liquid nitrogen in the man’s voice. “You see—zombies. Fast on the draw, good in the field, less than human. Less than animals, maybe; not even conscious. Maybe you don’t even think it’s possible to disrespect something like that. Like disrespecting a lawn mower, right?”
    “No, I—”
    “Let me tell you what I see. The man you were chatting with was called Azagba. Aza to his buddies. But he gave that up—either for something he believed in, or because it was the best of a bad lot of options, or because it was the only option he had. You look at Valerie’s entourage and you see a cheap joke. I see the seventy-odd percent of military bioauts recruited from places where armed violence runs so rampant that nonexistence as a conscious being is actually something you aspire to. I see people who got mowed down on the battlefield and then rebooted, just long enough to make a choice between going back to the grave or paying off the jump-start with a decade of blackouts and indentured servitude. And that’s pretty close to the best-case scenario.”
    “What would be worst case?”
    “Some jurisdictions still hold that life ends at death,” Moore told him. “Anything else is an animated corpse. In which case Azagba has exactly as many rights as a cadaver in an anatomy class.” He stabbed the air and nodded: “I was right: it’s precancerous.”
    Malawi, Brüks remembered.
    “That’s why you took her on,” he realized. “Not for me, not for Sengupta. Not even for the mission. Because she killed one of your own.”
    Moore looked right through him. “I would have thought that by now you’d have learned to keep your attempts at psychoanalysis to yourself.” He extracted a tumor pencil from the first-aid kit. “Any nausea? Headaches, dizziness? Loose stools?”
    Brüks brought his hand to his face. “Not yet.”
    “Probably nothing to worry about, but we’ll run a complete body scan just to be safe. Could be internal lesions as well.” He leaned in, pressed the pencil against Brüks’s face. Something electrical snapped in Brüks’s ear; a sudden tingling warmth spread out across his cheek.
    “I’d recommend daily scans from here on in,” Moore said. “Our shielding on approach wasn’t all it could have been.” He gestured for Brüks to move to the right, unfolded the medbed from the wall. “I have to admit I’m a bit surprised this started so soon, though. Maybe you had a preexisting condition.” He stood aside. “Lie back.”
    Brüks maneuvered himself over the pallet; Moore strapped him into place against the free fall. A biomedical collage bloomed across the bulkhead. 
    “Uh, Jim...”
    The soldier kept his eyes on the scan.
    “Sorry.”
    Moore grunted. “Perhaps I shouldn’t have expected you to be so fast on the uptake.” He paused. “It’s not as though you’re some kind of zombie.”
    “Roaches, you know—we fuck up,” Brüks admitted.
    “Yes. I forget that sometimes.” The Colonel took a breath, let it out softly through clenched teeth. “Before you showed up, I—well…”
    Brüks waited in silence, fearful of tipping some scale.
    “It’s been a while,” Moore said, “since I’ve had much call to deal with my own kind.”
    
     <tepi>God created the natural numbers. All else is the work of man. 
     <teps>—Leopold Kronecker

    “Got something for you.”
    It was a white plastic clamshell, about the size and shape to hold a set of antique eyeglasses. Lianna had fabbed a bright green bow and stuck it to the top.
    Brüks eyed it suspiciously. “What is it?”
    “The Face of God,” she declared, and then—deflated by the look he shot at her, “That’s kind of what the hive’s calling it, anyway. Piece of your slime mold.” She held it out with a flourish. “If Muhammad can’t come to the sample...”
    “Thanks.” He took the offering (try as he might, he couldn’t keep from smiling), and set it on the table next to dessert.
    “They thought you’d like to take a shot at, you know. Seeing what makes it tick.”
    Brüks glanced at a bulkhead window where three Bicamerals floated at the compiler, their gazes divergent as was their wont. (Not any Senguptoid aversion to eye contact, he’d come to realize; just the default preference for a  360-degree visual field, adopted by a collective with eyes to share.)  “Are they throwing me a bone, or do they just want someone expendable doing the dissections?”
    “A bone, maybe. But you know, this thing does have certain biological properties. And you are the only biologist on board.”
    “Roach biologist. And that slime mold’s got to be postbiological if it’s anything at all. And you know as well as I do that I’ve got better odds of getting a blow job from Valerie than—”
    He caught himself, too late. Idiot. Stupid, insensitive—
    “Maybe not,” Leona said after a pause so brief it might have been imaginary. “But you’re the only one in the neighborhood with a biologist’s perspective.”
    “You—you think that makes a difference?”
    “Sure. More to the point, I think they do, too.”
    Brüks thought about that. “I’ll try not to let them down, then.” And then: “Lee—”
    “So what you doing here, anyway?” She leaned in for a closer look at his display. “You’re running mo-cap.”
    He nodded, wary of speech.
    “What for? Slimey hasn’t moved since we got here.”
    “I’m, uh…” He shrugged and confessed. “I’m watching the Bicams.”
    She raised an eyebrow.
    “I’ve been trying to figure out their methodology,” he confessed. “Everyone’s got to have one, right? Scientific or superstitious or just some weird gut instinct, there’s at least got to be some kind of pattern...”
    “You’re not finding one?”
    “Sure I am. They’re rituals. Eulali and Ofoegbu raise their hands just so, Chodorowska howls at the moon for precisely three-point-five seconds, the whole lot of them throw their heads back and gargle, for fucksake. The behaviors are so stereotyped you’d call them neurotic if you saw them in one of those old labs with the real animals in cages. But I can’t correlate them to anything else that happens. You’d think there’d be some kind of sequence, right? Try something, if that doesn’t work try something else. Or just follow some prescribed set of steps to chase away the evil spirits.” 
    Lianna nodded and said nothing.
    “I don’t even know why they bother to make sounds,” he grumbled. “That quantum callosum or whatever they have has got to be faster than any kind of acoustic—”
    “Don’t spend too much effort on that,” Lianna told him. “Half those phonemes are just a side effect of booting up the hyperparietals.”
     Brüks nodded. “Plus I think the hive—fragments sometimes, you know? Sometimes I think I’m looking at one network, sometimes two or three. They drop in and out of sync all the time. I’m correcting for that—trying to, anyway—but I still can’t get any correlations that make sense.” He sighed. “At least with the Catholics, you know that when someone hands you a cracker there’s gonna be wine in the mix at some point.”
    Lianna shrugged, unconcerned. “You gotta have faith. You’ll figure it out, if it’s God’s will.”
    He couldn’t help himself. “Jesus Christ, Lee, how can you keep saying that? You know there’s not the slightest shred of evidence—”
    “Really.” In an instant her body language had changed; suddenly there was fire in her eyes. “And what kind of evidence would be good enough for you, Dan?”
    “I—”
    “Voices in the clouds? Fiery letters in the sky proclaiming I Am the Lord thy God, you insignificant weasel? Then would you believe?”
    He held up his hands, reeling in the face of her anger. “Lee, I didn’t mean—”
    “Oh, don’t back down now. You’ve been shitting on my beliefs since the day we met. The least you can do is answer the goddamn question.” 
    “I—well...” Probably not, he had to admit. The first thought that fiery skywriting would bring to his mind would be hoax, or hallucination. God was such an absurd proposition at its heart that Brüks couldn’t think of any physical evidence for which it would be the most parsimonious explanation. 
    “Hey, you’re the one who keeps talking about the unreliability of human senses.” It sounded feeble even to himself.
    “So no evidence could ever change your mind. Tell me how that doesn’t make you a fundamentalist.”
    “The difference,” he said slowly, feeling his way, “is that brain hack is an alternate hypothesis entirely consistent with the observed data. And Occam likes it a lot more than omnipotent sky wizard.”
    “Yeah. Well, the people you’re putting under your nanoscope know a thing or two about observed data too, and I’m pretty sure their publication record kicks yours all over the innersys. Maybe you don’t know everything. I gotta go.”
    She turned to the ladder, gripped the rails so hard her knuckles whitened.
    Stopped. Unclenched, a little.
    Turned back.
    “Sorry. I just…”
    “S’okay,” he told her. “I didn’t mean to, well…” Except he had, of course. They both had. They’d been doing this dance the whole trip downhill.
    It just hadn’t seemed so personal before.
    “I don’t know what got into me,” Lianna said.
    He didn’t call her on it. “It’s okay. I can be kind of a brain stem sometimes.” 
    She tried on a smile.
    “Anyhow, I do have to go. We’re good?”
    “We’re good.”
    She climbed away, smile still fastened to her face, bent just slightly to the left. Favoring ribs that medical technology had long since completely healed.
    
    <#>
    
    He wasn’t a scientist, not to these creatures. He was a baby in a playpen, an unwelcome distraction to be kept busy with beads and rattles while the grown-ups convened on more adult matters. This gift Lianna had brought him wasn’t a sample; it was a pacifier.
    But by all the laws of thermodynamics, it did its job. Brüks was hooked at first sight. 
    He pulled the gimp hood over his head, linked into the lab’s ConSensus channel, and time just—stopped. It stopped, then shot ahead in an instant. He threw himself down through orders of magnitude, watched molecules in motion, built stick-figure caricatures and tried to coax them into moving the same way. He felt distant surprise at his own proficiency, marveled at how much he’d accomplished in just a few minutes; wondered vaguely why his throat felt so dry and somehow eighteen hours had passed.
    What are you? he thought in amazement.
    Not computronium, anyway. Not organic. More like a Tystovitch plasma helix than anything built out of protein. Things that looked like synaptic gates were ticking away in there to the beat of ions; some carried pigment as well as electricity, like chromatophores moonlighting as associative neurons. Trace amounts of magnetite, too; this thing could change color if it ran the right kind of computations. 
    Not much more computational density than your garden-variety mammalian brain, though. That was surprising.
    And yet...the way it was arranged...
    He resented his own body for needing water, ignored the increasing need to take a piss until his bladder threatened to burst. He built tabletop vistas of alien technology and shrank himself down into their centers, wandered thunderstruck through streets and cityscapes and endlessly shifting lattices of intelligent crystal. He stood humbled by the sheer impossibility held in that little fleck of alien matter, and by the sheer mind-boggling simplicity of its execution.
    It was as though someone had taught an abacus to play chess. It was as though someone had taught a spider to argue philosophy.
    “You’re thinking,” he murmured, and couldn’t keep an amazed smile off his face.
    It actually did remind him of a spider, in fact. One particular genus that had become legendary among invertebrate zoologists and computational physicists alike: a problem-solver that improvised and drew up plans far beyond anything that should have been able to fit into such a pinheaded pair of ganglia. Portia. The eight-legged cat, some had called it. The spider that thought like a mammal.
    It took its time, mind you. Sat on its leaf for hours, figuring out the angles without ever making a move, and then zap: closed on its prey along some roundabout route that broke line-of-sight for minutes at a time. Somehow it hit every waypoint, never lost track of the target. Somehow it just remembered all those three-dimensional puzzle pieces with a brain barely big enough to register light and motion.
    As far as anyone could tell, Portia had learned to partition its cognitive processes: almost as if it were emulating a larger brain piece by piece, saving the results of one module to feed into the next. Slices of intellect, built and demolished one after another. No one would ever know for sure—a rogue synthophage had taken out the world’s Salticids before anyone had gotten around to taking a closer look—but the Icarus slime mold seemed to have taken the same basic idea and run with it. There’d be some upper limit, of course—some point at which scratchpads and global variables took up so much room there’d be none left over for actual cognition—but this was just a fleck, this was barely the size of a ladybug. The condenser chamber was awash in the stuff.
    What had Lianna called it? God. The Face of God.
    Maybe, Brüks thought. Give it time.
    “Scale-invariant shit it timeshares!”
    He’d almost gotten used to it by now. Barely even jumped at the sound of Rakshi Sengupta exclaiming unexpectedly at his side. He peeled the hood back and there she was, a meter to his left: eavesdropping on his models through an ancillary bulkhead feed.
    He sighed and nodded. “Emulates larger networks a piece at a time. That one little piece of Portia could—”
    “Portia.” Sengupta stabbed the air, stabbed ConSensus. “After the spider right?”
    “Yeah. That one little piece could probably model a human brain if it had to.” He pursed his lips. “I wonder if it’s conscious.”
    “No chance it’d take days just to chug through a half-second brain slice and networks only wake up—”
    “Right.” He nodded. “Of course.”
    Her eyes jiggled and another window sprouted off to one side: AUX/RECOMP, and the postbiological wonder painted on its guts. “Bet that could be though. What else you got?” 
    “I think it was designed specifically for this kind of environment,” Brüks said after a moment.
    “What space stations?”
    “Empty space stations. Smart mass isn’t anything special. But something this small, running cognition-level computations—there’s a reason you don’t run into that a lot on Earth.”
    Sengupta frowned. “’Cause being a thousand times smarter than the thing that’s trying to eat you isn’t much help if it takes you a month to be a thousand times smarter.”
    “Pretty much. Glacial smarts only pay off if your environment doesn’t change for a long time. ’Course it’s not such a bottleneck at higher masses, but—well, I think this was designed to work no matter how much or how little managed to sneak through. Which implies that it’s optimized for telematter dispersal—although if it isn’t using our native protocols, how it hijacks the stream in the first place is beyond me.”
    “Oh they figured that out couple days ago,” Sengupta told him.
    “Really?” Fuckers.
    “Know how when you pack a layer of ball bearings into the bottom of a crate and the second layer fits into the bumps and valleys laid down by the first and the third fits onto the second so it all comes down to the first layer, first layer determines all the turtles all the way up, right?”
    Brüks nodded.
    “Like that. ’Cept the ball bearings are atoms.”
    “You’re shitting me.”
    “Yah because I got nothing better to do than play tricks on roaches.”
    “But—that’s like laying down a set of wheels and expecting it to act as a template for a car.” 
    “More like laying down a set of tread marks and expecting it to act as a template for a car.”
    “Come on. Something has to tell the nozzles where to squirt that first layer. Something has to tell the second layer of atoms when to come though so that they can line up with the first. Might as well call it magic and be done with it.”
    “You call it magic. Hive calls it the Face of God.”
    “Yeah. Well, the tech may be way beyond us, but superstitious labels aren’t bringing it any closer.”
    “Oh that’s rich you think God’s a thing God’s not a thing.”
    “I’ve never thought God was a thing,” Brüks said.
    “Good ’cause it’s not. It’s water into wine it’s life from clay it’s waking meat.”
    Sweet smoking Jesus. Not you, too.
    He summed it up to move it along. “So God’s a chemical reaction.”
    Sengupta shook her head. “God’s a process.”
    Fine. Whatever.
    But she wasn’t letting it go. “Everything’s numbers you go down far enough don’t you know?” She poked him, pinched his arm. “You think this is continuous? You think there’s anything but math?”
    He knew there wasn’t. Digital physics had reigned supreme since before he’d been born, and its dictums were as incontrovertible as they were absurd. Numbers didn’t just describe reality; numbers were reality, discrete step functions smoothing up across the Planck length into an illusion of substance. Roaches still quibbled over details, doubtless long since resolved by precocious children who never bothered to write home: was the universe a hologram or a simulation? Was its boundary a program or merely an interface—and if the latter, what sat on the other side, watching it run? (A few latter-day religions had predictably answered that question with the names of their favorite deities, although Brüks had never been entirely clear on what an omniscient being would need a computer for. Computation, after all, implied a problem not yet solved, insights not yet achieved. There was really only one sort of program for which foreknowledge of the outcome didn’t diminish the point of the exercise, and Brüks had never been able to find any religious orders that described God as a porn addict.)
    So. The laws of physics were the OS of some inconceivable supercomputer called reality. At least that explained why reality had a resolution limit; Planck length and Planck time had always looked a bit too much like pixel dimensions for comfort. Past that, though, it had always seemed like angels dancing on the head of a pin. None of it changed anything way up here where life happened, and besides, positing universe as program didn’t seem to answer the Big Questions so much as kick them down the road another order of magnitude. Might as well just say that God did it after all, head off the infinite regress before it drove you crazy.
    Still…
    “A process,” Brüks mused. That sounded more—modest, at least. He wondered why Lianna had never spelled it out during their debates.
    Sengupta’s head bobbed. “What kind of process though that’s the question. Master algorithm defining the laws of physics or some daemon reaching up to break ’em?” Her eyes flickered briefly toward his, flickered away at the last instant. “That’s how we know it exists in the first place. Miracles.”
    “Miracles.”
    “Impossible events. Physics violations.”
    “Such as?”
    “Star formation way below the z-limit. Photons doing things they’re not supposed to the metarules changing over by the Cloverleaf Nebula.  They vindicated the Smolin model or something I dunno it’s beyond me so you’d never get it in a million years. But they found something impossible. Way down deep.”
    “A miracle.”
    “I think more than one but that’s what I said.”
    “Wait a second.” Brüks frowned. “If the laws of physics are part of some universal operating system and God, by definition, breaks them…you’re basically saying…”
    “Don’t stop now roach you’re almost there.” 
    “You’re basically saying God’s a virus.”
    “Well that’s the question isn’t it?”
    Portia iterated before them.
    What was it Lianna had said? We’ve always thought c and friends ruled supreme, out to the quasars and beyond. What if they’re just some kind of local ordinance?
    “What if they’re a bug?” he murmured.
    Sengupta grinned and stared at his wrist. “Change the whole mission wouldn’t it?”
    “This mission?”
    “Bicameral mission the mission of the whole Order. Reality’s iterating everywhere but there’re these inconsistencies. Maybe not the right reality, mmm? Change alpha a just bit and the universe stops supporting life. Maybe alpha’s wrong. Maybe life’s just a parasitic offshoot of a corrupted OS.”
    Somewhere in Brüks’s head, a penny dropped. 
    For fifteen billion years, the universe had been shooting for maximum entropy. Life didn’t throw entropy into reverse—nothing did—but it put on the brakes, even as it spewed chaos out the other end. The gradient of Life was the first scale any aspiring biologist learned to sing: the further you kept yourself from thermodynamic equilibrium, the more alive you were. 
    It’s the Anthropic Principle’s evil twin, he thought.
    “What—what is this mission, exactly?” Brüks asked softly.
    “Mmmm.” Sengupta rocked gently back and forth. “They know God exists already that’s old. I think now they’re trying to figure what to do with It.”
    “What to do with God.”
    “Maybe worship. Maybe disinfect.”
    The word hung there, reeking of blasphemy.
    “How do you disinfect God?” Brüks said after a very long time.
    “Don’t ask me I just fly the ship.” Her gaze slid back to the bulkhead, to the church of AUX/RECOMP and the alien emissary there. 
    “I think that puppy’s giving them some ideas though,” she said.
    
    <#>
    
    Lianna Lutterodt was lost in inner space when he sailed through the Commons ceiling. She blinked as he bounced off the deck, shook her head: her eyes came back to the here and now as a courtesy window opened on the bulkhead. A flatscreen concession to the neurologically disabled.
    Icarus. The confessional. A rosette of spacesuited monks, outward facing, visors raised to bare their souls before the face of God.
    “Hi,” Brüks said carefully.
    She nodded around a mouthful of couscous. “Rakshi says you made some serious headway. Even gave it name.”
    He nodded. “Portia. It’s pretty amazing, it…”
    Her gaze drifted back to the window. She can’t take her eyes off them, he thought, just as she did and caught him looking: “What?”
    “It’s not just amazing,” he told her. “It’s actually kind of scary.” He dipped his chin at the feed. “And they cut pieces out of it.”
    “They take samples,” Lianna said. “Almost like real scientists.” 
    “Something that reaches down across half a light-year and makes our own machines do backflips around the laws of physics.”
    “Not like they can get all the answers by just staring at it all day.”
    “I thought that was exactly how they got their answers.” 
    “They know what they’re doing, Dan.”
    “That’s one hypothesis. Want to hear another?”
    “I’m not sure.”
    “Ever hear of induced thanoparorasis?” he asked.
    “Uh-huh.” Lianna shrugged. “Common procedure among the augmented. Keeps ’em from collapsing into existential angst.”
    “It’s a bit more fundamental than that,” Brüks said. “Have you got it?”
    “Thanoparoasis? ’Course not.”
    “Are you going to die?”
    “Eventually. Hopefully not for a while.”
    “Good to know,” Brüks told her. “Because if you were a victim of ITP, you wouldn’t be able to answer that question. You might not even have heard it.”
    “Dan, I don’t—”
    “You and I”—raising his voice over hers—“we’re blessed with a certain amount of denial. You admit you’re going to die, you even know it intellectually on some level, but you don’t really believe it. You can’t. The thought of dying is just too damn scary. So we invent some Fairyland Heaven to take us in after we pass on, or we look to your friends and their friends to give us immortality on a chip or—if we’re hardcore realists—we just pay lip service to death and decay and keep right on feeling immortal anyway.
    “But some folks”—he nodded at the feed—“just get too damn smart. They put their heads together and develop insights way too deep to paper over with a few million years’ worth of whistling past the graveyard. People like that would know they were going to die, they’d feel it in the gut. They’d know what death means in a way you or I never could. And the only way they can keep from collapsing into whimpering puddles is to give denial a hand, cut a cognitive hole into the middle of their heads. We may live in denial most of the time but those people—they didn’t even show a fright response when it looked like their whole damn hive was an hour from the morgue. Like those agnosiacs who’d die of thirst in their own homes after some tumor’s destroyed their ability to recognize water.”
    “I don’t think they’re like that,” Lianna said softly.
    “Sure you do. You told me as much, remember?  Reset the sensory biases, randomize the errors.”
    They watched in silence as the hive poked a stick at something dangerous.
    “A lot of them died, not so long ago,” Brüks said after a while.
    “I remember.”
    “Me, too. And you know what I remember the most, you know what I can’t forget? Luckett rolling around in his own shit while his spinal cord shorted out, smiling and insisting that everything was going according to plan.”
    Lianna turned away, eyes bright. “I liked him. He was a good man.”
    “I wouldn’t know. All I know is, he sounded just like every hapless Yahweh junkie who ever looked around at all the horror and injustice in the world and mumbled some shit about how It’s not the place of the clay to question the potter. The only difference is that everyone else lays it all on God’s master plan and your Bicamerals talk about their own.” 
    “You’re wrong. They don’t think of themselves that way at all.”
    “Then maybe you shouldn’t, either. Maybe you shouldn’t have quite so much faith—”
    “Dan, shut the fuck up. You don’t know anything about it, you can’t know—”
     “I was there, Lee. I saw you. They’ve got you so convinced they’re infallible, they’ve got everything so factored five ways to Sunday that you didn’t even need a hole cut into your brain. You went straight into the lion’s den without missing a beat, you got right up in Valerie’s face and it didn’t occur to you for a microsecond that she’s your goddamn predator, she could rip your throat out without even thinking about it—”
    “Do not put that on them.” Lianna’s voice was flinty. “That was my mistake. Chinedum was—I will not let you blame anyone else for my stupidity.”
    “Isn’t that the way, though? Isn’t that how it’s always been? Just obey the guys in the funny hats and if it’s a win it’s all praise be to Allah but if your ass gets kicked it’s your fault. You read scripture the wrong way. You weren’t worthy. You didn’t have enough faith.”
    Some of the fight seemed to bleed out of her then; some of the old Lianna Lutterodt peeked through. She sighed, and shook her head, and ghosted a smiled. “Hey, remember when this used to be fun?”
    He spread his hands, feeling helpless. “I just…”
    “You mean well. I know. But after all you’ve seen, you can’t deny how far ahead of us they are.”
    “Oh they’re scary smart, I’ll give them that. They run circles around the best we roaches can throw at them, they snap this ship like a twig and pitch it all the way to the sun, drop us dead center onto Icarus’s dark side from a hundred million kilometers with barely a thruster tweak. But they glitch, just like we do. They still wash away their sins, because after all that rewiring their brains still mix up sensation and metaphor. They’re more glitchy than we are, because half their upgrades are barely out of beta—and while we’re on the subject, has anyone factored in the neuropsychologic impairment that a few weeks of hyperbaric exposure must be inflicting on all that extra brain tissue?”
    Lianna shook her head. “We’re not on the steppes anymore, Dan. We don’t measure success by how far you can throw a spear in a crosswind. They think rings around us in every way that matters.”
    “Uh-huh. And Masaso and Luckett are still dead. And all that poor bastard could cling to while his lights went out was that it was all according to plan.” He put his hands on her shoulders. “Lee, it’s not just that these people can’t wrap their heads around mortality. They can’t even entertain the possibility they could be wrong. If that doesn’t scare the shit out of you—” 
    She shook him off. “The plan was to get us to Icarus. Here we are.”
    “Here we are.” Brüks pointed to a hole in the wall, where a hived demigod communed with something that could change the laws of physics. “And how does it feel to know our lives depend on the judgment of something that can’t even imagine it could die?”
    
     <tepi>Wars teach us not to love our enemies, but to hate our allies.
     <teps>—W. L. George
    
    “What’s Rakshi got against you guys?”
    The lights were dimmed, the mutants and monsters were off pursuing their alien agendas, and the Glenmorangie was back on the table. Moore grimaced at Brüks, refriended, over the lip of his glass. “Who’s us guys?”
    “Military,” Brüks said. “Why’s she got such a hate-on for you?”
    “Not sure. Self-loathing, maybe.”
    “What’s that supposed to mean?”
    “Sengupta’s as much of a soldier as I am. She just doesn’t know it. Not consciously, at least.”
    “Metaphorically, you mean.”
    Moore shook his head, took another sip; his cheeks puckered as he swirled the single malt around in his mouth. He swallowed. “WestHem Alliance. Same as me.”
    “And she doesn’t know.”
    “Nope.”
    “What’s her rank?”
    “Doesn’t work like that.”
    “Some kind of sleeper agent?”
    “It’s not like that, either.”
    “Then what—”
    Moore raised a hand. Brüks fell silent.
    “I say army,” Moore told him, “you think boots on the ground. Drones, zombies, battlefield robots. Things you can see. Fact is, if you’ve reached the point where you need that kind of brute force, you’ve already lost.”
    Visions of the Oregon desert sprang into Brüks’ head. “Brute force seemed to work just fine for those fuckers who attacked the monastery.”
    “They were trying to stop us. Here we are.”
     Human bodies, turned to stone. The screams of dying Bicamerals.
    Not bodies, he reminded himself. Body parts. Here in the dusk of the twenty-first century it was so easy to confuse murder with the amputation of a fingertip. None of the usual definitions made sense when a single supersoul stretched across so many bodies.
    “Suppose you’re a political heavyweight,” Moore was saying. “A mover and shaker, a titan. And down around your ankles are all those folks you never used to worry about. The moved and the shaken. They don’t like you much. They never have, but historically that never mattered. Little people. Back in the day you just ignored them. The business of titans is other titans. 
    “But now they get into the nodes, they decrypt your communiqués, they hack your best-laid plans. They hate your guts, Daniel, because you are big and they are small, because you turn their lives upside down with a wave of your hand and they don’t care about realpolitik or the big picture. They only care about monkey-wrenching and whistleblowing.
    “And you find out about them. You find out about Rakshi Sengupta and Caitlin deFranco and Parvad Gamji and a million others. You give them what they want. You leave the back door open just a crack, so they can see your files on the African Hegemony. You let them sniff out a weakness in your firewall. Maybe one day they find out how to provoke a firestorm in one of your subsidiary accounts, bankrupt some puppet government you kept under your thumb for tax purposes.”
    “Except that’s not what they’re doing,” Brüks surmised.
    “No it’s not.” There was a hint of sadness in Moore’s smile. “It’s all window dressing. They think they’re really sticking it to you, but they’re being—herded. Into the service of agendas they’d never support in a thousand years, if they only knew. And they’re dedicated, Daniel. They’re ferocious. They fight your wars with a passion you could never buy and never coerce, because they’re doing it out of pure ideology.”
    “Should you be telling me this?” Brüks wondered.
    “You mean, state secrets? What’s a state, these days?”
    “I mean, what if I tell her?”
    “Go ahead. She won’t believe you.”
    “Why not? She already hates you guys.”
    “She can’t believe you.” Moore tapped his temple. “Recruits get—tweaked.”
    Brüks stared.
    “Or at least,” Moore elaborated, “she can’t believe she believes you.” He eyed his scotch. “On some level, I think she already knows.”
    Brüks shook his head. “You don’t even have to pay them.”
    “Sure we do. Sometimes. We make sure they have enough to make ends meet. Let them skim some cream from an offshore account, drop a legitimate contract into their in-box before the rent comes due. Mostly, though, we inspire them. Oh, they get bored sometimes. Kids, you know. But all it takes is a little judicious injustice, some new atrocity visited on the little people. Get them all fired up again, and off they go.” 
    “That seems a bit—”
    Moore raised an eyebrow. “Immoral?” 
    “Complicated. Why herd them into hating you? Why not just leave a trail of bread crumbs pointing back at the other guy?”
     “Ah. Demonize your enemy.” Moore nodded sagely. “I wonder why we never thought of that.” 
    Brüks grimaced.
    “Rakshi and her kind, they’re wise to the old school. You leak footage showing the slants skewering babies and it’ll take them maybe thirty seconds to find a pixel that doesn’t belong. Discredit the whole campaign. People put a lot less effort into picking apart evidence that confirms what they already believe. The great thing about making yourself the villain is, nobody’s likely to contradict you.
    “Besides.” He spread his hands. “These days, half the time we don’t even know who the real enemy is.”
    “And that’s easier than just tweaking them so they flat-out want to work for you.”
    “Not easier. Marginally more legal.” The Colonel sipped his drink. “A small agnosia to protect state secrets is one thing. Changing someone’s basic personality without consent—that’s in a whole other league.”
     Neither spoke for a while.
    “That is really fucked up,” Brüks said at last.
    “Uh-huh.”
    “So why’s she here?”
    “Driving the ship.”
    “Crown’s perfectly capable of driving itself, unless it’s even more old school than I am.”
    “Better to have meat and electronics backing each other up in low-intel scenarios. Complementary vulnerabilities.”
    “But why her? Why would she agree to work under someone she hated—”
    “This mission’s under Bicameral command,” the Colonel reminded him. “And anyone in Sengupta’s position would jump at an opportunity like this. Most of those people spend their time babysitting low-orbit crap-zappers from their bedrooms, praying that one of them glitches enough to warrant human intervention. Actual deep-space missions—anything with enough of a time lag to need onboard real-time piloting—those’ve been scarcer than snowstorms ever since Firefall. The Bicamerals had their pick of the field.”
    “Rakshi must be very good at her job.”
    Moore drained his glass, set it down. “I think in her case it was more a function of motivation. She has a wife on class-four life support.”
    “And no way to pay the bills,” Brüks guessed.
    “She does now.”
    “So they didn’t want the best and the brightest,” Brüks said slowly. “They wanted someone who’d do anything to save her wife.”
    “Motivation,” Moore repeated.
    “They wanted a hostage.”
    The soldier looked at him with something that might almost have been pity. “You disapprove.”
    “You don’t.”
    “You’d rather they picked someone who just wanted to get out of the house? Someone who was in it for the thrills or the bank balance? This was the humane choice, Daniel. Celu would have been dead. Now she’s got a chance.”
    “Celu,” Brüks said, and swallowed on a throat gone suddenly dry.
    Moore nodded. “Rakshi’s wife.”
    “What was, um...what was wrong with her?” Thinking: There’s no chance. It would be one in a million.
    Moore shrugged. “Bio attack, about a year ago. New England. Some kind of encephalitis variant, I think.”
    Then you’re wrong. She doesn’t have a chance. She doesn’t. I don’t care how much they spend keeping her heart beating, there’s no coming back from something like that.
    Oh my God. I killed her.
    I killed Rakshi’s wife.
    
    <#>
    
    It hadn’t been anything radical. It hadn’t even been anything new.
    The methodology was decades old, a proven tent pole for a thousand peer-reviewed studies or more. Everyone knew you couldn’t simulate a pandemic without simulating its victims; everyone knew that human behavior was too complex to thumbnail with a few statistical curves. Populations weren’t clouds, and people weren’t points; people were agents, autonomous and multifaceted. There was always the outlier who ran into the hot zone after a loved one, the frontline medic whose unsuspected fear of centipedes might cause him to freeze at some critical juncture. And since pandemics, by definition, involved millions of people, your simulation had better be running millions of human-level AIs if you wanted to get realistic results.
    Or you could piggyback on a preexisting model where each of a million data points was already being run by a human-level intelligence.
    Game worlds weren’t nearly as popular as they’d once been—Heaven had stolen away those myriad souls who preferred to play with themselves, free of community standards—but their virtual sandboxes were still more than large enough to keep them way out front as the CDC’s favorite platform for epidemiological research. For decades now, the plagues and sniffles that afflicted wizards and trolls alike had been tweaked and nudged toward specs that made them ideal analogs for the more pedestrian outbreaks afflicting what some still called the real world. Corrupted Blood bore more than a passing similarity to ectopic fibrodysplasia. The transmission dynamics of Beowulf’s Bane, an exotic glowing fungus that ate the flesh of elves, bore an uncanny resemblance to those of necrotizing fasciitis. Flying carpets and magic portals mapped onto airlines and customs bottlenecks; Mages to jet-setting upper-echelon elites with unlimited carbon ceilings. For a generation now, public health policies the world over had been informed by the lurid fantasy afflictions of clerics and wights.
    It was just bad timing that a Realist faction out of Peru figured how to hack that system when Dan Brüks and his merry band were running a sim on emerging infectious diseases in Latin America.
    Nobody caught it at the time. The Realists had been subtle. They’d left the actual disease parameters strictly alone: any sudden changes to mutation rate or infectivity would’ve shown up in the dailies. They’d tweaked the superficial appearance of infected players instead, according to location and demographic. Certain victims looked a bit sicklier than they should have, while others—wealthier PCs with gold and flying mounts at their command—looked a little healthier. It didn’t change the biology one whit, but it edged Human responses just a hair to the left. Subsequent outbreaks edged them a bit farther. The ripples spread out of gamespace and into the reports, out of the reports and into policy. Nobody noticed the tiny back door that had opened in the resulting contingency plans until six months later, when someone discovered a suspicious empty vial in the garbage behind the Happy Humpback Daycare Center. By then, a shiny new encephalitis mod had already slipped past Daniel Brüks’s first-response algorithms and was carving a bloody swathe from Bridgeport to Philadelphia. 
    Celu MacDonald had survived unscathed. She’d hadn’t even been in the kill zone; she’d been on the other side of the world, growing freelance code next to the girl of her dreams. Those weren’t as rare as they’d once been. In fact they’d grown pretty common ever since Humanity had learned to edit the dream as well as the girl. Soul mates could be made to order now: monogamous, devoted, fiercely passionate. The kind of love that prior generations had barely tasted before their hollow sacraments withered into miserable life sentences, or shattered outright as the bloom faded, the eye wandered, the genes reasserted themselves.
    Not for Macdonald and her kind, that empty hypocrisy. They’d ripped the lie right out of their heads, rewired and redeemed it, turned it into joyful truth with a lifetime warranty. First-person sex had even made a modest comeback in the shelter of that subculture, or so Brüks had heard.
    He didn’t know any of that at the time, of course. Celu MacDonald was just a name on a list of subcontractors, a monkey hired to grow code the academics couldn’t be bothered with. Brüks only learned of her after the fact: a bloody little coda at the end of the massacre.
    There’d been no conspiracy. No one had thrown her to the wolves. But the academics had had deans and CEOs and PR hotshots keeping their identities confidential, keeping their connections from staining the good names of venerable institutions. Nobody had given any cover to Celu MacDonald. When the dust had finally settled, when the inquiries and ass-covering and alibis had all run their course, there’d she’d been: standing alone in the crosshairs with hacked code dribbling from her hands.
    Maybe it had been Rakshi who’d found her, staring slack-jawed at the ceiling after some bereaved next of kin decided to make the punishment fit the crime. She would still have been breathing. The variant didn’t kill its victims. It burned them out and moved on; you could tell when it had finished because the convulsions stopped, at long last, and left nothing behind but vegetation.
    They’d found the guy that did it, eventually: dead for days, at the center of a micro-outbreak that had imploded under quarantine. Evidently he’d slipped up. But Rakshi Sengupta was still hunting. That was the word she’d used. Denied her revenge on the hand that had pulled the trigger, she was looking for the gunsmith. All that seething anger. All those hours spent trawling the cache. All that implanted idealized love, transmuted into grief: all that grief, transmuted into rage. The growled threats and mutterings about hunting dead men and debts owed and Some fucker going to be eating his own guts when I get hold of him.
    Rakshi Sengupta didn’t know it yet, but she was gunning for Backdoor Brüks.
    
    <#>
    
    She was waiting at the mouth of his tent.
    “Roach. Got something for you.”
    He tried to read her eyes, but they were averted. He tried to read her body language, but it had always been a cipher to him.
    He tried to keep the wariness out of his voice. “What you got?”
    “Just watch.” She called a window to the adjacent bulkhead.
    She doesn’t know. She couldn’t know.
    She’d have to look into my eyes for that...
    “What are you looking at?”
    “No—nothing. Just—”
    “Look at the window,” Sengupta said.
    I am so sorry, he thought. Oh God, I am so very sorry.
    He forced his eyes to the bulkhead: an over-the-shoulder view of a diagnostic chair, facing a flatscreen. A tropical savanna glowed there, lit by the grimy yellow light of a fading afternoon (Africa, Brüks guessed, although there were no telltale animals in frame). Telemetry framed the tableaux on every side: ribbons of heart rate, respiration, skin galvanics. A translucent brain scan glowed to the left, writhing with the iridescence of neurons firing in real time.
    Someone sat in that chair, almost totally eclipsed by its back. The top of their skull crested above a padded headrest, wrapped in the superconducting spiderweb of a tomo matrix. The tip of one armrest peeked into view; a hand rested there. The rest of the person existed only by inference. Fragments of a body, almost lost among the bright flayed images of its own electricity.
    Sengupta wiggled a finger: the still life began to move. A chrono readout ticked out the time at one second per second: 03/05/2090—0915:25. 
    “What do you see?” Not Sengupta talking. Someone in the video, speaking off stage.
    “Grassland,” said the person in the chair, face still hidden, voice instantly recognizable.
    Valerie.
    The grasses dissolved into storm-tossed waves; the yellowish sky hardened down to wintry blue. The horizon didn’t change position, though; it still bisected the scene halfway up the frame.
    Something tapped faintly on the soundtrack, like fingernails on plastic. 
    “What do you see?”
    “Ocean. Subarctic Pacific, Oyashio Current, early Feb—”
    “Ocean’s fine. Basic landscape, that’s all we want. One word.”
    A hint of motion, center right: Valerie’s fingers, just visible, drumming against the armrest.
    A salt flat, shimmering in summer heat. The edge of a mesa rose in the hazy distance, a dark terrace that split-leveled the horizon. 
    “What now?”
    “Desert.” Tick...tick tick tick...tap...
    Brüks glanced at Sengupta. “What is—”
    “Shhhh.”
    Same salt flat: the mesa had magically disappeared. Now a skeletal tree rose from the cracked earth, halfway to the horizon: leafless, yellow as old bone, a crown of naked branches atop a stripped featureless trunk almost too straight for nature. The trunk’s shadow reached directly toward the camera, like an unbroken phantom extension of the object itself.
    “Now?”
    “Desert.”
    “Good, good.”
    Down in the glass brain, a smattering of crimson pinpoints swept briefly across the visual cortex and disappeared.
    “Now?”
    Same picture, higher magnification: the tree was front and center now, its trunk straight as a flagpole, close enough to vertically split the horizon and a good chunk of the sky above. The speckles reappeared, a faint red rash staining the soap-bubble rainbows swirling across the back of Valerie’s brain. Her fingers had stopped moving.
    “Same. Desert.” There wasn’t a trace of expression in her voice.
    Right angles, Brüks realized. They’re turning the landscape into a natural cross...
    “Now.”
    “Same.”
    It wasn’t. Now the branches were out of frame: all that remained was the white of the land, the hard crystalline blue of the sky and the hypothetical razor-edged line between, splitting the world side to side. And that impossibly straight vertical trunk, splitting it top to bottom.
    They’re trying to trigger a glitch… 
    No longer a mere rash, glowing across the back of the vampire’s skull: a pulsing tumor. And yet her voice remained empty and untroubled; her body rested unmoving in the chair.
    Her face still unseen. Brüks wondered why the archivists had been so afraid to record it.
    Now the world on the screen began to come apart. The salt flat behind the tree came unstuck just a little at the bottom (the tree stayed in place, like a decal on glass), shrank up from the lower edge of the display like old curling parchment and revealed a strip of azure beneath: as if more sky had been hiding under the sand. 
    “Now?”
    The desert pixels compressed a little further, squeezed tighter against the skyline—
    “Same.”
    —compressed from landscape to landstrip, the undersky pushing it up from below, the horizon holding it down from above—
    “Now?”
    “S-same. I…”
    Scarlet auroras squirmed across Valerie’s brain. SKIN GALV and RESP shuddered along their time series.
    CARDIAC beat strong and steady and did not change at all.
    “And now?”
    The ground was almost all sky, now. The desert had been reduced to a bright squashed band running across the screen like a flatlined EEG, like a crossbeam at Calvary. The tree trunk cut it vertically at right angles.
    “I— sky, I think, I—”
    “Now?”
    “—know what you’re doing.”
    “Now?”
    The flattened desert shrank some critical fraction further; horizontal and vertical axes split quadrants of sky with borders of nearly equal thickness.
    Valerie began to convulse. She tried to arch her back; something stopped her. Her fingers fluttered, her arms shook against the padded arms of the chair; for the first time Brüks realized that she was strapped into the thing.
    Fireworks exploded across her brain. Her heart, so immutably stable until now, threw jagged spikes onto the time series and shut down completely. The body paused for a moment in midconvulsion, frozen in bone-breaking tetany for an endless moment; then the chair’s defibrillators kicked in and it resumed dancing to the rhythm of new voltage.
    “Thirty-five total degrees of arc,” the invisible voice reported calmly. “Three-point-five degrees axial. Rep twenty-three, oh-nine-nineteen.” The recording ended.
    Brüks let out his breath. 
    “Has to be real,” Sengupta grunted.
    “What?”
    “Horizon’s not real. It’s, it’s between. They don’t glitch on hypotheticals.”
    He thought he understood: vampires were immune to horizons. No matter how flat, no matter how perfect, they were zero thickness. You couldn’t build a cross with a horizon, not one that stopped Valerie and her buddies at least: for that, you’d need something with depth.
    “Really hard to get this,” Sengupta remarked. “The explosion scrambled the records.”
    “Explosion?”
    “Simon Fraser.”
    Realist attack, he remembered. A couple of months before he’d gone on sabbatical; the bomb had taken out a lab working on spindle emulation. He hadn’t heard anything about the vamp program being targeted, though.
    “There would’ve been backups,” he guessed.
    “For the footage sure. But how do you know it’s her, huh? You never see her face. The embeds just give a subject code. Gait recognition not so great when your target’s tied down.”
    “The voice,” Brüks said.
    “That’s what I used. Now try trawling the cloud with a random voice sample, no stress data, no contextuals.” Sengupta jerked her chin. “Like I said. Hard. But I got it now it’s getting easier all the time.”
    “They tortured her,” Brüks said softly. We tortured her. “Does—does Jim know about this?”
    Sengupta barked out a humorless laugh. “I wouldn’t tell that asshole what time zone he was in.”
    You don’t have to do this, Brüks thought. You don’t have to work so hard turning all that pain into anger. You could be free, Rakshi. Fifteen-minute tweak and they’d cut the grief right out of you, the same way they wired in the love. Twenty-five minutes and you’d forget you’d ever been in pain. 
    But you don’t want to forget, do you? You want the grief. You need it. Your wife’s dead, she’ll be dead forever but you can’t accept that, you’re clinging to Moore’s Law like a life jacket in a hurricane. Maybe they can’t bring her back now but maybe in five years, maybe ten, and in the meantime you’ll make do on hope and hate even if you haven’t figured out where they belong. 
    He closed his eyes while she smoldered at his side.
    God help me when you do.
    
    <#>
    
    Back in the Hub, she’d stripped the sun naked. It seethed and roiled overhead, close enough to touch (which he did, just for the surrealistic hell of it: a gentle push off the grille, a weightless drift, and Daniel Brüks could kiss the sky). But the curve of its edge was as clean and sharp as if razored: no flares, no prominences, no great gouts of plasma to dwarf a dozen Jupiters and fuck with Earthly broadcasts.
    “Where’s the corona?” he asked, thinking: Filters.
    “Ha that’s not the sun that’s the sun side.”
    Of Icarus, she meant: the sun and Icarus face-to-face, the light of one bouncing off the disk of the other into the eye of some remote camera, massively shielded, floating out front on the breath of a trillion hydrogen bombs.
    “Perfect reflector if you crank it up high enough,” Sengupta said. “Won’t do much for the rads but if you’re talking about thermal and visible spectrum I could turn this place into the coldest spot from here to the Oort.”
    “Wow,” Brüks said.
    “That’s nothing look at this.”
    The sun—the sun’s reflection—darkened by degrees. Those brilliant writhing coruscations began to dim: the sunspots, the weather systems, the looping cyclones of magnetic force began to fade from sight, sink into some colder cosmic background. Within moments the sun was a pale phantom on a dark mirror.
    Something else was there, though: other currents, convecting like a pot of molten glass brought to a rolling boil. Liquid mass upwelled near the center of the disk, swirled outward in an endless bloom of turbulent curlicues, cooled and slowed and stagnated near the darker perimeter. It was as though the solar photosphere had been stripped away to reveal some other, completely separate weather system churning beneath. 
    Except, Brüks realized after a moment, he wasn’t looking at the sun at all, not even in reflection. This was—
    “That’s Icarus,” he murmured. A great convex solar cell a hundred kilometers across: transparent or opaque, solid or liquid, its optical properties slaved to the whims of a glorified thermostat and Rakshi Sengupta’s little finger. Darker now, just a few degrees closer to blackbody status, the convection currents swirled ever faster as it worked to dump the excess heat.
    Off in some distant corner, an alarm woke with a soft beeping.
    “Um...,” Brüks began.
    “Don’t worry roach just throttling up a bit to build some extra ergs don’t want Earth to fall below quota do you?”
    The beeping continued, increasingly urgent. Insistent little tags began flashing near the bottom of the display, albedo falling, absorbance and ?T on the rise. 
    “I thought we’d already tanked up.” It had been the final phase of the reconstruction: the last of the Bicams had stowed their tools and abandoned the Crown’s refitted hull for a group hug around Portia, twelve hours before. (Apparently their brains fell out of contact beyond some limited range.)
    “Got some need more that’s a lot of mass we gotta get out from under.”
    Brüks couldn’t take his eyes off the sunside view: like looking down at a blooming mushroom cloud in the wake of an airburst. He knew it was only imagination but the Hub felt—warmer...
    He bit his lip. “Aren’t we overheating? Those tags—”
    “More product takes more power right? Basic physics.”
    “Not that much more.” Surely she hadn’t dialed down the reflectivity this far the last time, surely this was just—
    “Want to double-check my numbers roach? Don’t trust my math think you can do better?”
    —showing off...
    The sunside sparked and vanished from the dome: NO SIGNAL pulsed above the warning icons left behind.
    “Shit,” Sengupta spat. “Stupid cambot melted.” 
    “I’m impressed,” Brüks said quietly. “Now will you please just dial it back a—”
    “Quit fucking around, Rak.” Lianna ricocheted up from the southern hemisphere, bounced off the Tropic of Cancer and arced toward the forward hatchway. “We’ve got more important things to do right now.”
    “Yeah right more important than putting charge in the tank.” But her fingers twitched in the air, and the alarms dimmed a little. “Like what?”
    Lianna spun around a handhold and planted herself on the arctic circle. “Like Oldschool’s slime mold. It’s talking to us.” And disappeared through magnetic north.
     <tepi>The quickest way of ending a war is to lose it. 
     <teps>—George Orwell
    
    Talking was generous: the images that had begun crawling across Portia’s skin were crude, chunky things, primitive mosaics build from pixels a centimeter on a side. There was no window per se, no distinct bounded area within which relevant information was neatly displayed. The mosaics simply faded into existence and out again, the oily gray of default epidermis stippling gradually into a roughly circular area of increasing contrast, a black-and-white scratchpad reminiscent of a crossword puzzle. Brüks’s secular circuitry couldn’t discern any pattern there.
    Chromatophores, he remembered. This thing could change color if you ran the right current through it. “What started it up?”
    “Dunno don’t bug me.” Sengupta had demoted the helmet-cam feeds to a line of thumbnails; her attention was fixed on Icarus’s own stereocams, zoomed and focused on Portia’s—what? Graphics interface? The same picture respawned in several iterations across the dome: sonar, infrared, ultrasound. The mosaic only showed up along visible wavelengths: infrared and ultraviolet filters showed nothing but plain old Portia, a monochrome porridge devoid of surface detail.
    Smack dab in the middle of the human visual range, Brüks thought. Wouldn’t that be a coincidence... 
    “Ha!” Sengupta barked. “Z-contours the thing’s talking in terraces...” She zoomed the view. Sure enough the white pixels were elevated, little square mesas raised a millimeter above their darker counterparts. Brüks spawned his own window and zoomed even closer: the surfaces of all that topography were fracturing, folding, each pixel splitting and resplitting into a mesh of ever finer pigeonholes.
    “It’s building diffraction gratings!” Sengupta brayed.
    “And it’s increasing pixel-res—”
    “I said shut up!”
    Brüks bit back a response and cycled through MonkCam. The Bicamerals had fallen silent around the object of their veneration, played with their instruments, passed bands of radiation invisible and otherwise over Portia’s skin. Lianna was staying out of the way; her camera panned across the backs of helmets from the compartment hatch.
    The resolution on that patchy window was improving by the second now; pixels the size of thumbnails shattered into spots the size of lentils, dissolved again into swirling clusters of pinheads that collapsed into shards below the resolving power of the camera. Steps became sawtooth lines became smooth, swirling curves that swept across the display and faded into flat gray oblivion. Now Brüks could almost recognize the patterns moving there—each new geometry seemed more familiar than the last, tugged a little harder at some half-forgotten memory before giving up and giving way to the next iteration. But nothing stuck. Nothing lasted long enough to sink his teeth into—until the patterns slowed, and Rakshi and Lianna spoke a single word, a shout and a whisper uttered in the same instant:
    “Theseus.”
    
    <#>
    
    Eleven minutes was all it had taken. Eleven minutes for an anaerobic time-sharing slime mold to refine its pixels from the size of sugar cubes down to units that exceeded the resolving power of the human eye. Eleven minutes from coma to conversation.
    First-contact protocols. Fibonacci sequences, golden ratios, periodic tables. The Bicamerals scribbled cryptic responses onto tacpads and held them up in turn; Brüks was not especially surprised to note that Portia’s swirling communiqués were a lot more comprehensible than the Bicamerals’ responses.
    A shadow intruded subtly from the direction of the hatch, a hint of some presence beyond the lines of sight offered up by helmet feeds and onboard eyes. Icarus was full of blind spots; its cameras had not been installed with an eye to comprehensive surveillance. Brüks noticed, and tried not to.
    Sudden surprised murmurs from the Bicamerals; a soft oooh from Lianna. Brüks scanned the feeds, where geometric primitives acted out some arcane theorem across Portia’s skin. “Lianna. Talk to me.”
    “The GUI,” she told him. “It’s gone three-D.” Her feed circled the compartment, fixing Portia from every angle. “Some kind of lenticular diffraction effect. I’m seeing that whole display in three-D, we’re all seeing it in three-D. Wherever we move. The thing’s tracking us, it’s tracking five—uh, six pairs of eyes and pointing a customized diffraction grid at each one of us simultaneously. A single display surface.”
    “Doesn’t look three-D to me,” Sengupta grumbled. “Too dumb to track the stereocam.”
    Eleven minutes to derive the precise architecture of human eyesight. It seemed an impossibly short time to intuit a whole new sensory system from scratch, without invasion, without dissection. Except Portia hadn’t done that at all, most likely. It had probably taken the tutorials long before it ever made the in-system jaunt. Wherever the place it called home, it had at the very least made a pit stop at Theseus. These probably weren’t the first Humans it had encountered.
    Maybe there’d been some dissection after all.
    “Where’s Jim?” Lianna said.
    “Right here,” Moore said from the depths of the Crown. He’d been off-shift but he was back in the game. “I’m on my way.”
    “Uh, that’s a negative, Jim. We’d rather you stay back for now. Give us your insights from there.”
    “Why’s that?”
    “You know why. This thing’s using Theseus’s contact protocols. Your stock just went up.”
    “That’s ridiculous,” Moore said mildly. “I’ve been over there many times.”
    “It was never active before.” The slightest hint of exasperation tinged Lianna’s voice. “Come on, Jim, you know the rules about high-value assets better than anyone.” 
    “I do,” Moore agreed. “Which means my expert opinion should prevail. I’m coming over.”
    No sound over comm. On the great surveilling compound eye, points of view shifted and bobbed.
    “Fine,” Lianna said at last. “Don’t forget to suit up.”
    
    <#>
    
    Brüks and Sengupta, the last of the daycare buddies. They watched through one camera eye as Moore, fore in the attic, slid into his suit. They watched through a half dozen others as Ofoegbu et al returned to their rituals at the altar of First Contact, as Portia continued to iterate through stolen protocols; Sengupta grunted something about building a pidgin but all Brüks could see was plasma plots and dancing stick figures.
    “Little warm in there,” Sengupta remarked. Brüks barely heard her.
    Up in one corner of the compound eye, one of the Bicamerals—AMINA, according to the feed—panned away from the shrine and floated out of the sanctum; EULALI followed a moment later. The two began to trace a path back to the docking hatch. (Brüks felt a twinge of resentment on Moore’s behalf—as though the poor dumb caveman might get lost without a couple of grown-ups to show him the way.)
    Metal guts sailed past Moore’s feed: grilles, bulkheads, conduits and plumbing turning around his axis in constant lazy rotation. Landmarks passed in faster succession than Brüks had ever seen through Bicameral feeds: the radiator bus, the T-junction leading off to the LEAR hoop, that row of fluorescent pink high-pressure tanks he’d never been able to find on any schematic. Moore moved as if he’d been born to this place; he rounded one last corner like a dolphin twisting onto a new heading and he was there. Lianna and Ofoegbu moved aside to let him enter.
    Somehow he’d missed Amina and Eulali. Probably took a short cut, Brüks thought, glancing up at the nondescript passageway floating past in their feeds. That’ll teach ’em.
    Soft ululations from the sanctum. On Lianna’s feed Moore frowned stage left, evidently squeezing some kind of intelligence from those sounds.
    “I think I see the problem,” he said after a moment.
    Somewhere—else—Eulali and Amina had stopped moving. They hesitated for a moment, looming in each other’s feeds; then Janused back-to-back, turning slowly. Signage and hazard striping adorned a hatch in the background: VPR H2 storage, thruster assembly. Hard vacuum beyond.
    “It’s as you said,” Moore was saying back in the sanctum. “These are standard protocols.” His helmet cam held a tight focus on Portia’s paintings. Lianna’s feed showed him from the side, visor raised, cheek eclipsed by his helmet, his profile visible past the forward edge of the seal. Just past him, the node called Ofoegbu wasn’t looking at Moore or Portia: he was looking back through the open hatchway, into the corridor beyond—
    Wait a second, Brüks thought. Shouldn’t there be—
    That shadow, hinting at an unseen presence by the hatch. Gone now.
    Moore: “It’s using the same protocols we are.”
    Valerie had been there, just a few minutes ago. Now she was gone.
    “It’s reflecting our own protocols back at us. It’s completely rote.”
    Amina and Eulali. They weren’t going to meet Jim at all, Brüks realized. I bet they’re tracking Valerie...
    He foregrounded their feeds. They still faced in opposite directions, each presumably sharing in the wraparound vista of a conjoined visual field. Icarus drifted about them like a sharp-edged dream.
    “We’re not talking to an alien intelligence,” Moore continued. “We’re talking to a mirror.”
    Something caught Brüks’s eye, a tiny bright sparkle in the upper-left corner of Amina’s feed. A faint star drifting on the recycled breeze. He skimmed the stereocam menu, selected 27E —VAPOR CORE REACTOR—EXT. CORRIDOR. Same corridor, dorsal view.  Now he stared down at the tops of two open helmets; that floating star twinkled in the foreground. He zoomed the feed onto a sliver of glass—something like that, anyway—barely the size of a hangnail. A shard of something broken.
    A big place, Icarus. It went on forever, breathed through more than a thousand kilometers of ductwork. This glass speck could have come from anywhere.
    “You want to make any progress at all—” Moore said.
    No signs of stress or metal fatigue nothing popped nothing broken no bits floating around. 
    ...’Course you gotta go in there and check to be sure...
    “—you’ve got to break it.” 
    In the sanctum, Jim Moore extended his arm. Too late, Ofoegbu rushed to intervene. A bright little figurine sprang into existence on the palm of Moore’s hand, a hologram, an offering in the shape of a man.
    “This is my son.” Moore’s voice carried soft and clear along the channel. “Do you know him?”
    Portia’s interface imploded and disappeared.
    Holy shit holy shit— “Holy shit holy shit holy—” That was Sengupta beside him, locked in a loop, synced with another voice in Brüks’s own head. “Shut up,” Brüks said; amazingly, both obeyed.
    Moore’s hand didn’t move. The offering on its palm glowed steadily. Portia lay silent on its shrine while every sapient being within a hundred million kilometers held its breath. 
    After an endless moment, a single bright eye opened in the middle of that surface. Light spilled from its pupil, fountained swirling across some canvas of melanin and magnetite, settled finally into an image with arms and legs. Siri Keeton looked back at himself, arms spread just slightly at his sides, palms out.
    Brüks leaned forward. “Another mirror image.”
    Sengupta clicked and ticked and shook her head. “Not a mirror look at the hand the right hand.” She zoomed the feed to make it easy: a ragged line there, from the heel of the palm right up to the webbing between the index and ring fingers. As if something had torn Keeton’s hand apart, right down to the wrist, and glued it back together.
    Brüks glanced at Sengupta, trying to remember: “That’s not on Jim’s—”
    “Of course not that’s the whole fucking point isn’t—”
    A sudden strangled sound from somewhere in the network: Bicameral sounds, a host of complex harmonics that probably held volumes. All Brüks could decipher there was surprise: over at 27E —EXT. CORRIDOR. Eulali was charging up the passageway at full speed. Amina floated transfixed, staring straight at the camera—no, not at the camera. At that telltale shard floating in front of it.
    Everywhere, suddenly: pandemonium. 
    The helmet feeds at the shrine were all in frantic motion, swinging like drunken pendulums and sweeping the scenery too fast to make out whatever had scared them. Off down 27E Eulali bounced off a bulkhead (Wait a second; had there even been a bulkhead there a moment ago?) and retreated back toward Amina; another instant and both were gone from third-person view, lost but for the frantic blurry sweep of their suit cams. Sengupta grabbed AUX/RECOMP and spread it front and center across the dome, a top-down view of the shrine and its resident deity and its misbegotten acolytes caroming off solid metal where an open hatchway had gaped only a few moments before. Portia lay quiet as clay along condenser, its subtle mutilation of Siri Keeton glowing soft and steady as a child’s nightlight: the oily gray tentacle that lashed out toward Chinedum Ofoegbu sprouted from the far bulkhead, and Moore barely had time to push the monk out of the way.
    All in those final furious moments before the feeds went dark.
    Sengupta gibbered faintly to port. Brüks barely heard her. I know what that is, he thought as those last seconds played over in his head. I’ve seen these before, I’ve used these before, I know exactly what this is...
    Magnetite and chromatophores and crypsis. Cages broken and painstakingly rebuilt. Footprints wiped clean, disturbing alien smells erased, sensors and samplers carefully planted and natural habitat reconstructed along all axes.
    This is a sampling transect.
    He yanked the quick-release buckle on his harness, floated free. “We’ve got to get them out.” 
    Sengupta shook her head so hard Brüks thought it might come off. “No fucking way no fucking way we gotta get outta here—”
    He spun above the mirrorball, grabbed her by the shoulders—
    —“Don’t fucking touch me!”—
    —let her go but kept close, face-to-face, mere centimeters between them though she squirmed and turned her face away: “It doesn’t know we’re here do you understand? You said it yourself, too dumb to track the camera too dumb to know we’re here, they never let us onto Icarus so it’s never seen us. We can take it by surprise—”
    “Roach logic that’s stupid that doesn’t mean anything man we gotta leave—”
    “Don’t leave. Do you hear me? Stay here if you want but don’t you fucking leave until I get back. Boot up the engines if the damn things even work yet, but stay put.”
    She shook her head. An arc of spittle spread from her lips and fanned through the air. “What are you gonna do huh they’re ten times smarter than you and they never even saw it coming—”
    Good question. “In some ways, Rakshi. They’re ten times dumber in others. They know all about quarks and amplituhedrons but they didn’t get nailed by a piece of quantum foam, do you understand? They got nailed by a goddamned field biologist. And that’s a game I know inside out.”
    He cupped her head in his hands and kissed her on the crown—
    —“Don’t leave.”—
    —and leapt into the attic.
    
    <#>
    
    He shot through the rafters like a pinball, bouncing from strut to handhold, knocking aside straps and buckles and glistening blobs of oily water that splattered on contact. Brüks the baseline. Brüks the roach. Give it up, Danny-boy: don’t even try to think, you’ll only embarrass yourself in front of the grown-ups. Just nod and swallow what they feed you. Keep your mouth shut when Sengupta brushes off a discrepancy of a few millimeters as insignificant thermal expansion. Play it safe when Moore points out that Portia¸ wonder of wonders, grows; point to a puddle of candle wax on the machinery and dismiss it with a shrug. Don’t bother wondering whether the infiltration really stopped at such an obvious border. Forget that Portia computes and pattern-matches, forget its capacity to build mosaics of such intricate resolution that no meatball eye could tell the difference between a naked bulkhead and one sheathed in the thinnest layer of thinking plastic. Don’t let the results of your own half-assed research point you to the obvious: that Portia might coat everything like an invisible intelligent skin, that it’s there between whenever anyone boots up an interface or turns on the goddamn lights: watching everything we do, feeling every sequence our fingers tap against the panels. Just sit back and smile as the adults blunder innocently into an alien cage painted inside the man-made one.
    And when the traps snaps shut and all those pieces come together you can comfort yourself that the grown-ups didn’t see it either, that these brain-damaged groupthink Bicamerals aren’t so smart after all. You can die smug and vindicated with the best of them in a mass grave swinging around the sun.
    The lamprey gaped ahead and to port, highlighting edges and angles in blue pastel. Three empty spacesuits floated in their alcoves. Brüks considered and dismissed them in an instant: by the time he wriggled into one of those things, everyone on Icarus might be pickled in whatever Portia used for formalin. Up past the ’lock, though, encircling the forward reaches of the docking bay: an array of tools sufficient to cut a ship in two and build it back again.
    Portia could obviously lock its molecules into something like armor: Ofoegbu was not a small man and yet the slime mold—stretched thin across the hatch, drawn tight in seconds—had bounced him back into the compartment without even bending. But Brüks had seen this fucker from the inside, close up. He’d seen the pieces that let Portia talk, and think, and blend in; he had a least a rough idea of how those parts were structured and what they were made of.
    He was pretty sure they couldn’t all be fireproof.
    He yanked a welding laser from its mount and pulled himself aft, flipping off the safety and wrapping the tether around his wrist as he moved. An electric insect whined faintly up toward the ultrasonic as the capacitors charged.
    Down the lamprey’s throat: a glowing semiflexible trachea, reinforced by skeletal hoops at three-meter intervals. Soft padded striations extending the length of the passageway, the ligaments and muscles that moved the tunnel during docking. A biosteel frame hove into view around the curve, a massive square hatch embedded within: Icarus’s main airlock, sealed and solid as a mountain, reassuringly industrial after all this squishy biotecture.
    Pressed into the alloy off to the side, a handle nested within a crimson dimple. Brüks grabbed it, braced himself with one foot to either side; turned; pulled. The dimple turned green around his fist. The airlock sighed open. He grabbed its edge, swung it back, ignored the yellow flashing of nervous smart paint warning against DUAL HATCH DISCONNECT: stared through an open inner hatch into the labyrinth beyond.
    Enemy territory. He had no way of knowing how far it extended. Maybe Portia was looking back at him now.
    He hefted the welder and pushed off.
    No animatics to guide him. No convenient schematics rotating in his head, no bright icon to pinpoint his location. He remembered the way from a dozen suit feeds, from his own solitary voyeurism. He didn’t know how useful those memories might be. Maybe they were as reliable as any roach’s. Maybe the very architecture had changed.
    Gross anatomy would get him to the sanctum: down the longitudinal notochord, right fork past the LEAR hoop, turn right again under the coolant nexus. If he was lucky, someone would be making sounds to guide him the rest of the way.
    Should’ve grabbed a helmet, he thought, looking backward with perfect clarity. Should’ve brought something with a comm link. An extra laser or two for Jim and the boys.
    Shit shit shit.
    Sounds ahead, sounds to starboard, sounds behind: a glimpse of motion from the corner of his eye as he sailed past some side tunnel that had never made it onto his mental map. He grabbed at a passing rib; the laser sailed on, yanked him forward by the wrist, pulled him off balance and sent him tumbling into the bulkhead. His head cracked painfully against a strut; the laser, jerking at the end of its strap, recoiled through weightless space and punched him in the chest.
    Shouts from behind. A small chorus of wordless, panicky voices. An almost electrical slithering sound.
    Brüks cursed and launched himself back the way he’d come. The forgotten passageway slid toward him; he braked, grabbed, swung around the corner—
    —and nearly ran headlong into a wall congealing before him like a membrane of living clay.
    In the time it took him to stop and gibber to himself—
    —I almost touched it I almost touched it It almost got me—
    —the membrane had transmuted to biosteel, rigid and impenetrable and almost thick enough to muffle the sounds of carnage on the other side.
    Not biosteel, Brüks reminded himself. Not impenetrable.
    Not fireproof.
    He brought up the welder.
    No. Not fireproof at all.
    Portia squirmed where the beam hit, curled and blackened and iridesced like an oil slick. Brüks kept the focus tight, the beam as steady as free fall and nerves could keep it. It burned through, opened a hole that dilated like an eye: stretched elastic tissue split apart, recoiling from the hit. The beam weaved briefly, scoring inert metal on the other side, barely missing one of the figures beyond before Brüks’s killed the circuit.
    And stopped, blinking.
    Taken in during that endless, frozen moment: a tunnel with no deck and no ceiling, its walls buried behind an infestation of pipes and conduits, capped by a T-junction ten meters in. Five spacesuited figures, helmets open, halfway down that length. At least one shattered visor: a cloud of coppery crystal shards following their own small trajectories, some polished as new mirrors, others stained and splattered by a band of crimson mist that arced from a small silvered body turning in midair. Brüks knew who it was even before the face came into view, even before he saw those sightless eyes staring bone-white from a black mask.
    Lianna.
    The others moved under their own power. Amina, making desperately for the faint hope Brüks had just opened before her. Evans, flailing through the carnage in search of a handhold or a brace point, finding only the rag-doll embrace of a corpse entangled in passing. Azagba, the legless zombie: lashing out quick as a striking snake, spinning Amina around by the shoulder, driving the straightened fingers of one bladed hand pistonlike into her open helmet and turning her off in an instant. Another of Valerie’s zombies bounding forward like something arboreal, reaching out after Evans to do the same.
    Brüks fired the torch. The zombie saw it coming and twisted like an eel but she was trapped in midair, purely ballistic, wed to inertia for just that instant too long. The beam bounced briefly off her silver abdomen, flash-burned a slash of cauterized charcoal across her exposed face . Amazingly she stayed on target: burned and half blind, one eye boiled and burst in its socket she lashed out and crushed Evan’s throat in passing, bounced off metal viscera, grabbed the nearest handhold without even looking.
    Portia was there, too. It felt the clasp and returned it, wrapped glistening waxy pseudopods around that hand faster than even zombie reflexes could respond. Wisps of white vapor swirled at the seams where suit and slime fused together. The trapped zombie looked down with one dead dancing eye; but when she raised her head again there was something else in that face.
    “Jesus,” she breathed. She doubled over in a great wracking cough, hand embedded in the wall; blood and spittle swirled around her face. “What am I—oh God, what’s—”
    The light faded in her eye; the tics and stutters that reasserted themselves seemed dead even by zombie standards, the twitch of dying cells released on their own recognizance.
    Jim would know your name, Brüks thought. 
    Something moved past her shoulder, past the drifting bodies, way down at the T-junction: behind the crack in the closet door, down in the space beneath the bed. Another glint of silver, moving with silent purpose: another figure, rounding the corner.
    Valerie.
    For a moment they stared at each other across a litter of corpses: predator with a look of distracted curiosity, prey because he simply couldn’t look away. Brüks didn’t know how long the moment lasted; it might have gone on forever if Valerie hadn’t lowered her faceplate. Maybe that was an act of mercy, the breaking of a headlight paralysis that would have kept him frozen right up until she tore him limb from limb. Maybe she just wanted to give him a sporting chance.
    Brüks turned and fled.
    Coolant clusters. Service tunnels. Sealed hatches leading to far-off places he’d never explored or long-since forgotten. He passed them unseeing, let instinct steer the meat while his global workspace filled with predator models and pants-pissing terror. He was passing a tertiary heat sink and he could see Valerie closing through the back of his head; he was at the Cache Hatch and he could see her lips drawn back in that gleaming predatory grin; he was fleeing up the notochord and he could feel her muscles bunching for the final killing blow.
    In the lamprey now: No time to stop, no chance to bar the way, you even think about dogging that hatch and she’ll be on you before you even turn around. Don’t look back. Just keep running. Don’t think about where, don’t think about when: thirty seconds is a lifetime, two minutes is the far future, it’s the moment that matters, it’s now that’s trying to kill you. A voice ahead, as panicky as the one inside, echoing down the throat and getting louder: all shit shit shit and docking clamps and numbers going backward—but Don’t worry about that either, that’s for later, that’s for ten seconds from now if you’re still alive and—
    The Crown.
    End of line. Nowhere else to go, no more time to buy. All the future you have, right now.
    Nothing left to lose.
    Brüks turned and stared back down the throat; Valerie stood there, casually braced against the lip of Icarus’s inner hatch, looking up through the mirrored cyclops eye of her helmet. She might have been standing there for hours, just waiting for him to turn around and notice her.
    Now that he had, she leapt.
    He brought up the laser and snarled. Valerie sailed toward him; Brüks could have sworn she was laughing. He fired. The beam scattered off the reflective thermacele of the vampire’s spacesuit, shattered into a myriad emerald splinters bright as the sun. They scorched split-second tracks on random surfaces before Valerie darted out of the way.
    Brüks lunged for the hatch controls, grabbed the lever, fumbled. The Crown clenched her front door a fraction, relaxed it again. Valerie closed for the kill, arms outspread. Somehow he could hear her: a mere whisper, impossibly audible even over Sengupta’s panicked chanting on comm. A voice as clear as if she were murmuring at his shoulder, as if she were right inside his head:
    I want you to imagine something: Christ on the cross...
    Electricity sang, deep down in his bones. Synapses snapped like blown circuits. Brüks’s flesh hummed like a tuning fork, every muscle thrown instantly into tetanus. Wet warmth bloomed at his crotch. He couldn’t move, couldn’t blink, could barely even breathe. Some distant part of him worried briefly about that last fact, then realized that it probably didn’t matter. Valerie was bound to kill him long before he had a chance to suffocate.
    In fact here she came now, reaching out—
    —and careening away, struck from behind. Jim Moore loomed up in her stead, his face utterly reptilian, eyes dancing frantic little jigs in the dark cavern of his open helmet. He pushed Brüks into the bay, slammed the airlock shut behind them both; his fist came down on Brüks’s chest not quite hard enough to crack the sternum through the suit. Something broke in there, though; something unlocked, and Brüks was sucking back great tidal washes of recycled air. By the time he stopped gasping Moore had webbed him into an empty alcove for safekeeping, an occupied suit next to empty ones. 
    There were plenty of those.
    The Crown was a symphony orchestra, warming up: the creak and groan of stressed metal, the distant cough of awakening engines, the random percussion of buckles clanking against bulkheads pushed into grudging motion. Sengupta’s vocals, crackling out panicked numbers. A rogue droplet of oil floated in place while the ship shifted around it, splashed against Brüks’s cheek with a whiff of benzene.
    From somewhere very far away, the roar of an ocean. 
    Moore’s hands brought up an interface on the bulkhead. His fingers played those controls with inhuman precision. A window opened to one side, an exterior feed rendered in smart paint: a smear of ragged blue light lashing back and forth, the lamprey torn free and recoiling into some distant burrow. A play of stars and shadow and knife-edged geometries blocking out the heavens. Dim red constellations flashed along wire-frame gantries: cliffs of black alloy stretched far and wide to their own horizons.
    Valerie’s helmet, blocking the view. Fists pounding against the hull, any possible sound drowned out by the vibration of the engines. Sunrise, sudden and scalding: the whole universe burst into flame as the Crown of Thorns lumbered out of eclipse. Somewhere Sengupta was cursing; somewhere else, thrusters fired. For one brief instant Valerie was a black writhing shadow against a blinding sky: then burst into flame an instant before the pickup fried.
    Moore’s fingers never stopped dancing.
    It took endless seconds for the backup camera to kick in. By the time it did they were back in hiding, huddled in Icarus’s shadow, the starless black silhouette of the radiator spire sliding past to port. A gentle hand began to nudge Brüks down against the bottom of the alcove, mass-times-acceleration pulling him out against the webbing. The dim zodiac of the array’s streetlights receded slowly to stern—but other lights ignited back there as he watched, a pentagon of hot blue novae flaring silently in the darkness. It was only then that another silence registered: Moore had stopped talking to the wall, stilled the machine-gun staccato of his fingers against metal. Brüks could barely make out a fuzzy shape at the edge of vision; it took a Herculean effort to move his eyes even a fraction of a degree, to bring the Colonel into focus. He never did succeed completely. But he squeezed enough from his peripheral vision to see the old warrior standing still as stone against the deck, one hand half-raised to his face. He thought he heard a soft intake of breath caught halfway, and decided to call it the sound of a returning soul.
    Icarus shrank away. The sun burst back into view around it. Five blue sparks still flickered even in the light of that blinding corona: five bright dots in a dwindling black disk in a sea of fire. Stabilizing thrusters, Brüks realized distantly, and wondered why they burned so long and so bright, and wished that the answer hadn’t come to him so quickly.
     The newborn gravity kept putting on weight. It pulled Brüks ever harder against his restraints, leaned him out of the alcove and angled over the deck. His knees did not buckle under the strain; his body did not collapse. He was breathing statuary, and some gut sense stronger than logic knew that he would not crumple if those straps gave way: he would topple to the deck and shatter.
    The spacesuits beside him had disappeared. Rotting corpses hung in their stead, slivers of gray flesh dangling through the mesh, maggots dripping like rice grains from empty eye sockets. Grinning mandibles clicked and clattered and uttered incomprehensible sounds. REM paralysis, one part of Brüks said to another, although he was not asleep. Hallucination. The corpses laughed like something less dead, coughing through mud.
    Floaters swarmed in his eyes. Half visible in the encroaching fog, Jim Moore stood against the deck without benefit of webs or incantations or anything but the crushing awareness of his own actions. Darkness closed in. With the last few synapses sparking in his cache, Brüks wondered what Luckett might have said in the face of such a toll.
    Probably that everything was going according to plan.

   <ct>Predator

      <epi>You have to understand, Deen, this is the fifth attack on Venezuela’s jet-stream injection program so far this year. Stratospheric sulfates are still down by three percent and even if there aren’t any further attacks, we’ll be lucky if they recover by November. Any agro who can’t afford seriously drought-hardened transgenics is going to have a disastrous summer. Clones and force-grown crops from higher lats should be able to pick up the slack—as long as we don’t suffer a repeat of last year’s monoculture collapse—but local shortages are pretty much inevitable.
      We’re well aware that the Venezuelan program is technically illegal (you think none of us have read the GBA?) but I don’t have to tell you about the benefits of stratospheric cooling. And even if geoengineering is a short-term solution, you gotta use what you can or you don’t live long enough to reach the long term. Of course Caracas isn’t doing itself any favors with their idiotic adherence to an outmoded judicial system. Personal culpability? What are these [EPITHET AUTOREDACT] going to come up with next, witch-dunking?
      So I can speak for the whole department when I say that we sympathize completely. And if you folks over in Human Rights want to blacklist them again, go right ahead. But the bottom line is, You can’t ask us to withdraw support for Venezuela. The world just can’t afford to see even modest climate-mitigation efforts sabotaged like this. 
      I know how bad the optics are. I know how tough it is to sell an alliance with a regime whose neuropolitics are rooted in the Middle Ages. But we’re just going to have to take this dick in our mouths and swallow whatever comes out. Stratospheric cooling is one of the few things keeping this planet from falling on its side right now, and as you know that technology takes a lot of power.
      If it makes you feel any better, consider the fact that if this had happened twenty, twenty-five years ago we wouldn’t even be having this conversation; we didn’t have enough Joules in hand back then to be able to afford these kinds of options. We’d probably be tipping into another Dark Ages by now. 
      Thank God for Icarus, eh? 
      <eps>—fragment of internal UN communiqué (correspondents unknown):
      recovered from corrupted source released during a scramble 
      competition between unidentified subsapient networks, 
      1332:45 23/08/2091
    
     <epi>I have never for one instant seen clearly within myself. How then 
     would you have me judge the deeds of others? 
     <eps>—Maurice Maeterlinck
    
    He woke up weightless. Unseen hands guided him like a floating log through the Hub, through a southern hemisphere that didn’t move any more than he could. Rakshi Sengupta called in from somewhere far away, and she did not bray or bark but spoke in tones as soft as any cockroach: “This is taking too long we’re gonna start falling back if we don’t restart the burn in five minutes tops.”
    “Three minutes.” Moore’s voice, much closer. “Start your clock.”
    And that’s all of us, Brüks thought distantly. Just Jim, and Rakshi, and me. No vampires left, no undead bodyguards. Bicamerals all gone. Lianna dead. Oh God, Lianna. You poor kid, you poor beautiful innocent corpse. You didn’t deserve this; your only crime was faith…
    One of the axial hatches passed around him. In the next instant he was swinging around an unaccustomed right angle: the Crown’s spokes, rigged for thrust, still laid back along her spine. Rungs scrolled past his face as Moore pushed him headfirst to stern.
    All our children, gone. Smarter, stronger, leaner. All those souped-up synapses, all those Pleistocene legacy issues stripped away. Where did it get them? Where are they now? Dead. Gone. Turned to plasma.
    Where we’ll be, probably, before long... 
    Maintenance and Repair. Moore folded out the medbed and strapped him in just as the Crown began clearing her throat. By the time he turned to leave, weight was seeping back into the world. Brüks tried to turn his head, and almost succeeded. He tried to clear his throat, and did.
    “Uh...Jim...” It was barely above a whisper. The Colonel paused at the ladder, a vague silhouette in the corner of Brüks’s eye. The ongoing burn seemed to sink him into the deck.
    “...Th—thanks,” Brüks managed.
    The silhouette stood silently in the burgeoning gravity.
    “That wasn’t me,” he said finally, and climbed away.
    
    <#>

    Moore was not the only one to visit. Lianna returned to him from the grave, a dark flickering plasma who smiled down on his frozen features and shook her head and whispered You poor man, so lost, so arrogant before the sun called her back home. Chinedum Ofoegbu stood for hours at his side and spoke with fingers and eyes and sounds that stuttered from the back of his throat, and somehow Brüks understood him at last: not the ululating cipher, not the intelligent hive cancer, but a kind old man whose fondest childhood memory was the family of raccoons he’d surreptitiously befriended with a few handfuls of kibble and subtle sabotage inflicted on the latch of the household organics bin. Wait—you had a childhood? Brüks tried to ask, but Ofoegbu’s face and hands had disappeared under eruptions of buboes and great ropy tumors, and he could no longer get out the words. 
    Rhona even came back from Heaven, though she’d sworn she never would. She stood with her back to him, and fumed; he tried to turn her around and make her smile, but when she did the expression was bitter and furious and her eyes were full of sparks. Oh, do you miss her? she raged. You miss your mindless puppet, your sweet adoring ego-slave? Or is it just the fact that you’ve lost the one small fake part of your whole small fake life where you had some kind of control? Well the chains are off, Dan, they’re off for good. You can rot out here for all I care.
     But that’s not what I meant, he tried, and I never thought of you that way, and—when he finally ran out of denials and had nothing else to say: Please. I need you. I can’t do it on my own…
    Of course you can’t, she sneered. You can’t do anything on your own, can you? I’ll give you that much: you’ve actually turned incompetence into a survival strategy. Whatever would you do if you actually lost your excuses, if you augged up like everyone else? How would you ever survive without your disability to invoke when you can’t keep up?
    He wondered what Heaven could possibly be like, to make her so vindictive. He would have asked but Rhona had turned into Rakshi Sengupta right in front of his fossiled eyes, and her train of thought seemed to have jumped to a whole different track. You gotta stay away from the bow, she whispered urgently, glancing nervously over her shoulder. You gotta stay out of the attic, he’s in there now and maybe something else. I wish you’d come back this could be bad and I’m only good with numbers, you know? I’m not so hot in meatspace.
    You’re doing fine, Brüks tried to say. You’re even starting to talk like one of us roaches. But all he could manage was a croak and a cough and whatever Rakshi heard seemed to scare her more than his silence had.
    Sometimes he opened his eyes to see Moore looming over him, moving shiny blinking chopsticks in front of his face. Once or twice an invisible roaring giant stood on his chest, pressing him deep into the soft earth at his back (the sparse bands of new-grown grass on the bulkhead bowed low against the wall, every blade in uniform alignment); other times he was as weightless as a dandelion seed. Sometimes he could almost move, and the creatures gathered at his side would startle and pull back. Other times he could barely roll his eyes in their sockets.
    Sometimes he woke up.
    
    <#>
    
    Something sat at his side, a vaguely humanoid blur at the edge of eyesight.  Brüks tried to turn his head, unfix his gaze from the ceiling. All he could see was pipes and paint.
    “It’s only me.” Moore’s voice. 
    Is it. Is it really.
    “I guess you weren’t expecting it,” said the blur. “I’m actually surprised that Sengupta didn’t tell you. It’s the kind of thing she’d enjoy spreading around.” 
    He tried again. Failed again. His cervical vertebrae seemed—fused, somehow. Corroded together.
    “Maybe she doesn’t know.”
    Brüks swallowed. That much he could do, although his throat remained dry.
    The blur shifted and rustled. “It’s a mandatory procedure where I come from. Too many scenarios when conscious involvement—compromises performance.  Whatever the military is these days, you don’t get into it unless you…”
    A cough. A reset.
    “The truth is, I volunteered. Back when everything was still in beta, before it was policy.”
    Do you get to decide, Brüks wondered, when it comes and goes? Is it a choice, or is it a reflex?
    “You may have heard we just go to sleep. Lose all awareness, let the body run on autopilot. So we won’t feel badly about pulling the trigger, afterward.” Brüks heard a note of bitterness in the old man’s voice. “It’s true enough, these days. But we first-gen types, we—stayed awake. They said it was the best they could do at the time. They could cut us out of the motor loop but they couldn’t shut down the hypothalamic circuitry without compromising autonomic performance. There were rumors floating around that they could do that just fine, that they wanted us awake—for debriefing afterward, experienced observer in the field and all—but we were such hot shit we didn’t really care. The sexy bleeding edge, you know. First explorers on the post-Human frontier.” Moore snorted softly. “Anyway. After a few missions that didn’t quite go according to plan, they rolled out the Nirvana Iteration. Even offered me an upgrade, but it—I don’t know. Somehow it just seemed important to keep the lights on.” 
    Why are you telling me this? What does it matter, now that you've thrown the world’s lifeline into the sun?
    “What I’m saying is, I was there. The whole time. Only as a passenger—I wasn’t running anything—but I didn’t go away. I’m not like Valerie’s mercenaries, I was—watching, at least. If that makes you feel any better. Just wanted you to know that.”
    It wasn’t you. That’s what you’re saying. It’s not your fault.
    “Get some rest.” The blur stretched at his side; the Colonel’s face resolved briefly in Brüks’s field of focus, faded again to the sound of receding footsteps.
    Which paused.
    “Don’t worry,” Moore said. “You won’t be seeing it again.”
    
    <#>
    
    The next time he woke up Sengupta was leaning over him.
    “How long?” Brüks tried, and was relieved to hear the words come out.
    She said: “Can you move yet try to move.”
    He sent commands down his legs, felt his toes respond. Tried wiggling his fingers: his knuckles were rusted solid.
    “Not eashily,” he said.
    “It’ll come back it’s just temporary.”
    “Wha’ she do to me?”
    “I’m working on that listen—”
    “It’s like some kind of ass-fac—ass-backwards Crucifix Glitch.” His tongue fought its way around the words. “How the hell did she—baysh—baselines don’t glitch, we don’t have the shircuits—”
    “I said I’m working on it. Look we got other things to worry about right now.”
    You’ve got other things, maybe—“Whersh Jim?”
    “That’s what I’m trying to tell you he’s up there in the attic he’s up there with Portia I think—”
    “Whah!”
    “Well how do we know how far that shit spread huh it coulda coated the whole inside of the array and we never woulda known. Coulda grown all the way up to our front door and got inside.”
    His sympathetic motor nerves were still working at least: Brüks could feel the hairs rising along his forearms.
    “Anybody take sh—take samples?”
    “That’s not what I do I’m a math maid not a bucket boy I don’t even know the protocols.”
    “You couldn’t look them up?”
    “It’s not what I do.”
    Brüks sighed. “What about Jim?”
    Sengupta stared past him. “No help he just keeps reading those letters from home over and over. I told him but I don’t think he even cares.” She shook her head (she did it so effortlessly), added: “He comes down here sometimes checks up on you. He’s been shooting you up with all sorts of GABA and spasmolytics he says you should be good to go by now.”
    He flexed his fingers; not too bad, this time. “It’s coming back, I guess. Body’s just out of practice.”
    “Yah it’s been a while. Anyway I gotta get back.” She stepped across the hab, turned back at the base of the ladder. “You gotta get back in the game Dan things are getting weird.”
    They were, too.
    She’d never called him by name before.
    
    <#>
    
    He’d stopped slurring his words by the time Sengupta had departed; five minutes later he could roll from side to side without too much discomfort. He bent knees and arms in small hard-won increments, ratcheting each joint against the brittle resistance of his own flesh. At some critical angle his right elbow cracked and pain splintered down his arm like an electrical shock: but the limb worked afterward, bent and straightened at his command with nothing but a dull arthritic aching in the joint. Encouraged, he forced his other limbs past their breaking points and reclaimed them for his own.
    Reclaimed from what? he wondered.
    The medical archives reenacted the corruption of his flesh in fast-forward: a body flooded with acetylcholine, Renshaw cells compromised, ATP drawn down to the fumes by fibrils that just wouldn’t stop clenching. No ATP to cut in and ask myosin for this dance; nothing to break the actin-myosin bond. Gridlock. Tetany. A charley horse that froze the whole damn body. 
    The mechanism was simple enough: once the action potentials started hammering that fast it could only end one way. But this didn’t seem to be drug induced. Valerie hadn’t spiked his coffee or slipped anything into his food. His medical telemetry hadn’t picked up the trail until long minutes after Brüks had been hit, but as far as he could tell those signals had come from his own brain: CNS to alpha-motor to synaptic cleft, boom boom boom.
    Whatever this was, he’d inflicted it on himself.
    He took his time in checking out. Time to extract the catheters and stretch his limbs; time to boot his defossilized corpus back into some semblance of an active state. Time to refuel: his convalescence had left him ravenous. Almost an hour had passed by the time he climbed out of M&R in search of whatever the galley might serve up.
    He was halfway across the Hub before he noticed the light bleeding from the spoke.
    
    <#>
    
    A snapshot of the past: a corpse, laid out on the lawn. Brüks didn’t know which element was the more incongruous.
    The lawn, he supposed. At least that was unexpected: not so much a lawn as a patchy threadbare rug of blue-green grass—rusty in the dim longwave vampires preferred—ripped from the walls of the hab and strewn haphazardly across the deck. Vampires had OCD, Brüks remembered vaguely. The mythical ones at least, not the ancient flesh-and-blood predators that had inspired them. Seventeenth-century folk legends had it that you could drive a vampire to distraction by the simple act of throwing salt in its path; some supernatural brain circuit would compel it to drop everything and count the grains. Brüks thought he’d read that somewhere. Probably not peer reviewed.
    For all he knew, that ridiculous superstition might have at least a rootlet in neurological reality. It certainly wasn’t any more absurd than the Crucifix Glitch; maybe some pattern-matching hiccup in those omnisavant brains, some feedback loop gone over the top. Maybe Valerie had fallen victim to the same subroutine, seen all those thousands of epiphytic blades and torn them from their bulkhead beds with her bare fingernails, counting each leaf as it fluttered to the deck in a halfhearted chlorophyllous blizzard.
    Of course, the catch was that vampires didn’t have to count: they would simply see the precise number of salt grains or grass leaves in an instant, know that grand seven-digit total without ever going through the conscious process of adding it up. Any village peasant who sacrificed two seconds scattering salt in his path would buy himself a tenth-of-a-second’s grace, tops. Not a great rate of exchange.
    Maybe the zombie hadn’t known that, though. Maybe the homunculus behind the eyes had rebooted just in time to see what was coming, maybe it somehow wrested control back from all those shortcuts and back alleys and tried one last-ditch Hail Mary with nothing left to lose. Maybe Valerie had let it, watching, amused; maybe even played along, pretended to count each falling blade while her dinner turned the deck into a haphazard shag rug. 
    Maybe the zombie hadn't even cared. Maybe it had just lain down on command and waited to be eaten. Maybe Valerie had just wanted a tablecloth.
    The zombie’s throat had been slashed. It lay spread-eagled on its stomach, naked, face turned to the side. The right buttock had been carved away; the quads; one long strip of calf muscle. There was flesh above and flesh below: in between, a flensed femur connected the lower leg to the torso, socketed into the broad scraped spatula of the pelvic girdle.
    There was very little blood. Everything had been cauterized.
    “You never checked it out,” Brüks said.
    Sengupta zoomed the view: the gory table setting expanded across the window. Blades of grass grew to the size of bamboo shoots; tooth marks resolved like jagged furrows on bared bloody bone.
    Some kind of wire snaked through the grass—barely visible even at this magnification—and disappeared beneath the half-eaten corpse.
    “Found eight wires don’t know what for exactly but that thing wasn’t exactly Secret Santa you know? Carnage said probably booby traps and Carnage is probably right for once. She wanted us to see this.”
    “How do you know?”
    “This is the only feed she didn’t break.” Sengupta waved the recording off the bulkhead.
    “So you jettisoned the habs.”
    She nodded. “Too risky to go in too risky to leave ’em there.”
    Another feed abutted the first, a view down the truncated spoke that had once led to Valerie’s lair. It ended after only twenty meters now, in a pulsing orange disk flashing UNPRESSURIZED back up the tunnel at two-second intervals. Just like the Commons spoke opposite, cut loose in turn to keep the vectors balanced. 
    He remembered downhill conversations, the sound of glasses clinking together. “Shit,” he said.
    “It’s not like they’re not all the same you know they all got the same plumbing and life support.”
    “I know.”
    “And it’s not like we’re gonna run out of food or air what with everybody being dead and—”
    “I fucking know,” Brüks snapped, and was surprised when Sengupta fell immediately silent.
    He sighed. “It’s just, the only half-decent moments I’ve had on this whole bloody trip were in Commons, you know?”
    She didn’t speak for a moment; and when she did, Brüks couldn’t make out the words.
    “What did you say?”
    “You talked to him down there,” she mumbled. “I know that but it doesn’t matter even if it was still here he’s not. He just sits up in the attic and runs those signals over and over like he never even left Icarus…”
    “He lost his son,” Brüks said. “It changed him. Of course it changed him.”
    “Oh yah.” She barely spoke above a whisper. Something in that voice made Brüks long for the trademark hyena laugh. “It changed him all right.”
    
    <#>
    
    No excuses left. Nothing else to do.
    He ascended into the Hub, breached its sky into the guts beyond: hissing bronchioles, cross-hatched vertebrae, straight-edged intestines. He moved like an old man, free fall and residual paralysis and the spacesuit he’d scavenged from the cargo-bay airlock all conspiring to take him to new depths of clumsiness. Up ahead, the paint around the docking hatch splashed the surrounding topography with the usual diffuse glow.
    This is where the shadows come, Brüks realized. Every other corner of the Crown is bright as a swimming pool now that the Hold’s off-limits, now that Valerie’s cave has been cut loose. Shadows don’t have a chance back there. 
    They’ve got nowhere else to go... 
    “Welcome back to the land of the living.”
    Jim Moore turned slowly in the rafters, just past the airlock. The lines of his face, the edges of limbs moved in and out of eclipse.
    “This is living?” Brüks tried.
    “This is the waiting list.” 
    He thought he might have seen a smile. Brüks pushed himself across the attic and pulled a welding torch from the tool rack: checked the charge, hefted the mass. Jim Moore watched from a distance, his face full of shadow.
    “Uh, Jim. About—”
    “Enemy territory,” Moore said. “Couldn’t be helped.”
    “Yeah.” A fifth of the world’s energy supply, in the hands of an intelligent slime mold from outer space. Not a cost-benefit decision Brüks envied. “The collateral, though…”
    Moore looked away. “They’ll make do.”
    Maybe he was right. Firefall had slowed Earth’s headlong rush to offworld antimatter; a power cord stretched across a hundred fifty million kilometers was far too vulnerable for a universe in which godlike extraterrestrials appeared and vanished at will. There were backups in place, fusion and forced photosynthesis, geothermal spikes driven deep into the earth’s crust to tap the leftover heat of creation. Belts would be tightened, lives might be lost, but the world would make do. It always had: the beggars and the choosers and the spoiled insatiable generations with their toys and their power-hungry virtual worlds. They would not run out of air, at least. They would not freeze to death in the endless arid wastes between the stars.
    For Moore so loved the world that he gave his only begotten son. Twice.
    “Anyway,” Moore added, “we’ll know soon enough.”
    Brüks chewed his lip. “How long, exactly?”
    “Could be home in a couple of weeks,” Moore said indifferently. “You’d have to ask Sengupta.”
    “A couple—but the trip down took—”
    “Using an I-CAN running on half a tank, and keeping our burns to an absolute minimum. We’re on purebred beamed-core antimatter now. We could make it to Earth in a few days if we opened the throttle. We’d just be going too fast to stop when we got there. End up braking halfway to Centauri.”
    Or somewhere in between, Brüks thought.
    He looked across the compartment. Moore pinwheeled slowly through light and shadow and looked back. This time the smile was as unmistakable as it was cryptic.
    “Don’t worry about it,” he said.
    “About...?”
    “We’re not headed for the Oort. I’m not taking you away on some misguided desperate search for my dead son.”
    “I—Jim, I didn’t—”
    “There’s no need. My son is alive.”
    Maybe six months ago. Maybe even now. I supposed it’s possible. Not in six months, though. Not after the telematter stream winks out and leaves Theseus to freeze in the dark. 
    Not after you cut him adrift...
    “Jim...”
    “My son is alive,” Moore said again. “And he’s coming home.”
    Brüks didn’t say anything for a while. Finally: “How do you know?”
    “I know.”
    Brüks pushed the torch with one hand into the other, felt the solid reality of mass and inertia without: the fragility of aching body parts within. “Okay. I, um, I should take some samples—”
    “Of course. Sengupta and her invading slime mold.”
    “Doesn’t cost anything to check it out.”
    “’Course not.” Moore reached out a casual hand, anchored himself to an off-duty ladder. “I take it the suit’s a condom.”
    “No point in taking chances.” Watching Moore in his yellow paper jumpsuit, the Colonel’s naked hand clenched on untested territory.
    “No helmet,” Moore observed.
    “No point in going overboard, either.” If Portia ran on ambient thermal, it wouldn’t be getting enough joules from the bulkhead to sprout any pseudopods on short notice. Besides, Brüks felt stupid enough as it was.
    Under Moore’s bemused gaze he positioned himself to one side of the hatch and dialed the beam down to short focus. Smart paint sparked and blistered along the lip of the hatch. Nothing screamed or recoiled. No tentacles extruded from the metal in frantic acts of self-defense. Brüks scraped a sample from the scored periphery of the burn. Another from the untouched surface a few centimeters further out. He moved systematically around the edge of the hatch, taking a sample every forty centimeters or so.
    “Will you be using that on me?” Moore wondered behind him.
    I should. “I don’t think that’s necessary just yet.”
    Moore nodded, his face impassive. “Well. Change your mind, you know where I am.”
    Brüks smiled.
    I wish I did, my friend. I really wish I did.
    But I don’t have a fucking clue.
    
    <#>
    
    Out of the attic into the Hub.
    Looks like the Hub, anyway. Could be a lining. Could be a skin.
    Through the equator, from frozen north to pirouetting south. Try not the touch the grate on your way through.
    Could be watching me right now. I could be swimming through an eyeball.
    Don’t be an idiot, Brüks. Portia had years in Icarus; you were there for three weeks. Not nearly enough time to grow enough new skin to—
    Unless it didn’t grow new lining, unless it just redistributed the old. Unless it spent all those years building up extra postbiomass as an investment against future expansion. 
    It couldn’t just ooze through the front door and down the throat without anyone noticing. (Coasting between an eyeball and an iris, now: one open, one shut, both silver. Both blind.) No kinetic waste heat, no mass alarms—
    Unless it moved slowly enough to blend in with the noise. Unless it happens to know a little more about the laws of thermodynamics than we do...
    Down the spoke, putting on weight, staring hard at the gloved fingers clenched around their handhold. Alert for subtle mycelia threading between suit and stirrup. Eyes open for any bead of moisture there, some meniscus of surface tension that might belie a film in motion.
    You’re being paranoid. You’re being an idiot. This is just a precaution against a remote possibility. That’s all this is.
    Don’t go off the deep end. You’re Dan Brüks. 
    You’re not Rakshi Sengupta.
    You only made her.
    
    <#>
    
    He heard her moving in the basement as he fed samples into the holding tray. He tried to ignore her foot taps and mutterings as the scrapings cycled through quarantine, as he gave in to reawakened hunger and wolfed down whatever the lab hab’s bare-bones galley disgorged, swallowing not quite fast enough to stay ahead of the Spirulina aftertaste. 
    Finally, though, he gave in: pushed from above by Moore’s matter-of-fact dissonance, pulled from below by Sengupta’s compulsive scuttling. He climbed down out of the lab, maneuvered around the giant seedpod obstruction of Sengupta’s tent beside his own. The pilot was running ConSensus on the naked bulkhead between two impoverished bands of astroturf. The Crown of Thorns rotated there in animatic real time, two of her limbs amputated at the elbow. We keep going at this rate and we’re going to be three spacesuits and a tank of O2 by the time we get home, Brüks mused.
    A dot on the map: MOORE, J. floated safely distant in the attic. Other readouts formed a sparse mosaic across the bulkhead; Brüks couldn’t understand them all but he was pretty sure that one or two involved the blocking of intercom feeds.
    She turned as his feet hit the deck, stared expectantly at his lapel.
    “Jim,” he said. 
    “Yah.”
    “You said he’d—changed...” 
    “Don’t have to take my word for it you saw it yourself he’s been changing ever since we left LEO.”
    Brüks shook his head. “He was only—distracted before. Preoccupied. Never delusional.”
    Sengupta ran her fingers down the wall; file listings flew by too fast for Brüks to make out. “He was transmitting into the Oort did you know that? Even before we left Earth he broke the law hell he helped make that law after Firefall nobody else could get away with it but man, he’s the great Jim Moore and he was—sending messages...”
    “What kind of messages?”
    “To Theseus.”
    “Well, of course. He was with Mission Control.”
    “And it talked back.”
    “Rakshi. So what?”
    “It’s talking to him now,” Sengupta said.
    “Uh—what? Through all the interference?”
    “We’re out of the solar static already most of it anyhow. But he’s been collecting those signals for way longer some of the timestamps go back seven years and they change. All the early stuff that’s all just telemetry you know? Lot of voice logs too but mainly just data, all the sensor records contingency analyses and about a million different scenarios that vampire that Sarasti was running when they were closing on target. It was dense there was noise all over the signal but the streams were redundant so you can make it out if you run it through the right filters right? And then Theseus goes dark you don’t hear anything for a while and then there’s this—”
    She fell silent.
    “There’s what, Rak?” Brüks prompted gently. 
    She took a breath. “There’s this other signal. Not tightbeam. Omnidirectional. Washing over the whole innersys.”
    “He said Theseus went dark,” Brüks remembered. “They went in and lost contact and that was all anybody knew.”
    “Oh he knew. It’s really thin and it’s so degraded you can barely make it out even with every filter and noise-correction algorithm in the arsenal I don’t think you’d even see it if you didn’t already know it was there but Colonel Carnage, man, he knew. He picked it out, and it’s...it’s...”
    Her fingers danced and jittered in the air between them. The faintest breeze of static wafted through the hab: the moan of a distant ghost.
    “That it?” Brüks asked.
    “Almost but then you add the last couple of Fouriers and—”
    —And a voice: thin, faint, sexless. There was no timbre to it, no cadence, no sense of any feeling behind the words. Any humanity it ever might have contained had been eroded away by dust and distance and the dull microwave rumble of a whole universe roaring in the background. There was nothing left but the words themselves, not reclaimed from static so much as built from the stuff. A whisper on the void:
    Imagine you are Siri Keeton. You wake in an agony of resurrection...record-shattering bout of sleep apnea spanning one hundred forty...feel your blood, syrupy...forcing its way through arteries shriveled by months on standby. The body inflates in painful increments: blood vessels dil...flesh peels apart from flesh; ribs crack...udden unaccustomed flexion. Your joints have seized up through disuse. You’re a stick man, frozen...rigor vitae. You’d scream if you had the breath.
    The hab fell silent.
    “What the fuck was that?” Brüks whispered after a very long time.
    “I dunno,” Sengupta drummed her fingers on her thigh. “The start of a story. It’s been coming through in bits and pieces, every few years according to the timestamps. I don’t think it’s finished, either, I think it’s still—in progress.”
    “But what is—”
    “I don’t know okay? It says it’s Siri Keeton. And there’s something underneath it too not words exactly I don’t know.”
    “Can’t be.”
    “Doesn’t matter what you or I think he thinks it’s Siri Keeton. And you know what he’s talking back to it I think he’s talking back.”
    My son is alive.
    “He’s got a while to wait. If that’s really coming from the Oort it’ll be a solid year before he can even think about getting an answer.”
    Sengupta shrugged and looked at the wall.
    He’s coming home.
     <tepi>Any sufficiently advanced technology is indistinguishable from nature. 
     <teps>—Stella Rossiter
    
    Negative.
    Negative.
    Negative.
    Torn lattices and broken nanowires and mangled microdiodes. Eviscerated smart paint. Nothing else.
    For hours now he’d let worst-case scenarios play out in his imagination. Portia had expanded into the Crown. Portia had spread past the attic. Portia had oozed invisibly across every bulkhead and every surface, coated the skins of tents and of crewmembers, wrapped itself around every particle of food each of them had taken into their mouths from the moment they’d docked. Portia enveloped him like a second skin; Portia was inside him, measuring and analyzing and corroding him from the outside in and the inside out. Portia was everywhere. Portia was everything.
    Bullshit. 
    His neocortex knew as much, even as his brain stem stole its insights and twisted them to its most paranoid ends. Whatever Portia’s ultimate origin, it was the telematter system that had built it: lasers etching blank condensates into thinking microfilms that planned and plotted and spread across each new frontier like a plague of cognition. However far it had spread, however much or little had infiltrated the Crown, it couldn’t keep growing once severed from the engine of its creation. They hadn’t been docked that long: surely the enemy couldn’t have achieved anything but the most superficial penetration of the front line.
    The samples were clean. 
    Which proved, of course, absolutely nothing.
    Aboard Icarus it had sprung shut like a leg-hold trap—but it had had unlimited power to play with, and eight years to learn how to use it. One passive filter on the solar panels, damped by a thousandth of a percent. One short-circuited electrical line, sparking and heating the surrounding metal. That’s all it would have taken—just time, and a little Brownian energy to keep it fed.
    What had Sengupta said so offhandedly, just before Portia had attacked? Little warm in there...
    It can’t sprint without stockpiling energy, he mused. Maybe it builds up a detectable heatprint before it pounces... 
    Sengupta poked her head up through the floor. “Find anything?”
    Brüks shook his head as she climbed onto the deck. 
    “Yah well I did. I found how that fucking vampire turned you to stone and better you than me, sorry but it coulda been me or Carnage either for all I know. I think she did it to all of us.”
    “Did what, exactly?”
    “You ever been scared roach?”
    All the time. “Rakshi, we almost died—”
    “Before that.” Sengupta head jerked back, forth. “Scared for no reason scared just going to the bathroom.”
    Something jumped in his stomach. “What did you find?”
    She threw a camera feed onto the wall: an eye in the attic, looking down along the empty compartment to the Hub hatch. Sengupta zoomed obliquely on a patch of bulkhead beside the secondary airlock. Someone had scrawled some kind of glyph across that surface, a tangle of multicolored curves and corners that might have passed for some Cubist’s rendition of a very simple neural circuit.
    “I don’t remember seeing that before,” Brüks murmured.
    “Yah you do you just don’t remember it. Only lasts two hundred milliseconds pure luck this showed up on a screen grab. You see it but you don’t remember it and it scares the shit out of you.”
    “Not scaring me now.”
    “This is just one frame roach it’s part of an animation but the cameras don’t scan fast enough and they’re all gone now. I had to sieve like a bugger to even get this much.”
    He stared at the image: a jagged little tangle of lines and arabesques, a piece of abstract graffiti maybe a hand’s-width across. It almost looked meaningful when spied from the corner of the eye, like a collection of letters on the verge of forming a word; it dissolved into gibberish when you looked at it. Even cut out of sequence, even spied from this oblique angle, it made his brain itch. 
    “It’s like she painted—gang signs,” he said softly. “All over the ship.”
    “That’s not all she did the way she moved remember I said I didn’t like the way she moved all those little clicks and ticks—shit even that time she attacked me and then you I saw her whisper things in your ear what did she say to you huh?”
    “I—don’t know,” Brüks realized. “I don’t remember.”
    “Yah you do. Just like that time in Budapest, changed your wiring with vibrations like lining up a bunch of beer glasses pretty wild right?” Sengupta tapped her temple three times in rapid succession, hard. “Not even radical I mean you can’t hear a word or smell a fart without your brain rewiring at least a bit that’s how brains are everything reprograms you. She just figured out where to stamp on the floor to make you freeze up on command. Coulda happened to me just as easy.”
    “It did happen to you,” Brüks said. “Why did you attack her, Rak? I saw you in the Hub, you went at her like a rabid dog. What got into you?”
    “I dunno it was like she was making these noises they just really pissed me off I dunno couldn’t help myself.”
    “Misophonia.” Brüks barked a soft bitter laugh. “She gave you misophonia.”
    Images from Simon Fraser: Valerie strapped to a chair, tapping on the armrest...Even back then she was doing it. Even when they were torturing her, she was—reprogramming them...
    He couldn’t help laughing.
    “What?” Sengupta said. “What?”
    “You know the secret of a good memory?” He bit back on another laugh. “You know what really kicks the hippocampus into overdrive, burns tracks into your brain faster and deeper than anything this side of direct neuroinduction?”
    “Roach you gotta—”
    “Fear.” Brüks shook his head. “All that time, playing the monster. I thought she was just into sadistic games, you know? I thought she just got off on scaring us. But she was never that—gratuitous. She was only cranking up the baud rate…”
    Sengupta smacked her lips and looked out the window.
    He snorted softly. “Even that time in the attic, Lee and I—we couldn’t even look. We just knew she was up there, but we were facing each other, Rak. We were each terrified by something to our left but we were facing each other—” Of course we were, it’s obvious. Why didn’t I see it before? “I bet she wasn’t there at all, it was just—temporoparietal hallucinations. Night hags. Sensed-presence bullshit.”
    “Roach remembers.” Sengupta was almost whispering. “Roach is starting to wake up…”
    “She was moving us around like checkers.” Brüks didn’t know whether to be awed or terrified. “The whole time...”
    “And what else did she program into us huh? We gonna start seeing things that aren’t there or go walking naked on the hull?”
    Brüks thought about it. “I don’t—think so. Not if she hacked us all the same way, anyway. Basic things, sure. Fear. Lust. Stuff that’s universal.” He smiled, a bit grimly, at the thought of the Crown’s surviving denizens sprouting preprogrammed hard-ons and spiked nipples. And that is really not a picture I need in my head right now. “You want to hack higher-level behavior, you’re getting into formative childhood experiences, specific memory pathways. Too many individual differences for one-size-fits-all.”
    Sengupta clicked her teeth. “That’s old roach talking new roach should know better. Who knows what that—”
    “She couldn’t hack the Bicamerals,” he said slowly.
    “What?”
    “These tricks—they exploit classic pathways, they’d never work on someone who’d remixed their brain circuitry. She had to get them out of the way.” A thousand pieces fell suddenly, blindingly into place. “That’s why she attacked the monastery, that’s why she didn’t just knock on the front door with an offer. She wanted to goad them into getting noticed. She knew how the roaches would respond, right down to a weaponized biological just lethal enough to keep the hive out of the way for the trip but not lethal enough to derail the mission completely. Fuck.” He sucked in his breath at the thought.
    “You see the problem,” Sengupta said.
    I don’t see anything but problems. “Which one in particular?”
    “She’s a vampire she’s prepost-Human all wrapped up into one. These fuckers solve NP-complete problems in their heads and they drop us like go stones and she’s stupid enough to just accidentally get locked outside when we leave?”
    Brüks shook his head. “She burned. I saw her. Ask Jim.”
    “You ask him.” She turned, her eyes lifting from the deck the moment his face fell from view. “Go on. He’s right up there.”
    “No hurry,” Brüks said after a moment. “I’ll see him when he comes down.”
    
    <#>
    
    To stern the transplanted parasol held back the sun: a great black shield, coruscations of flame still flickering intermittently past its edges. Ahead, the stars: one at least crawled with life and chaos, too distant yet to draw the eye, more hypothesis than hope but closing, closing. That was something.
    In between:
    A metal spine webbed in scaffolding, lumpy with metal tumors. Spokes and habs and cauterized stumps sweeping one way across the sky; a weighted baton sweeping the other to balance the vectors. The Hub. The Hold: a cylindrical cavern abutting the shield to stern, its back end ragged and gaping into space. Once it had been full of cargo and components and thinking cancers: now it was packed with tonnes of uranium and precious micrograms of antihydrogen and great toroidal superconductors big as houses.
    And shadows everywhere: webs and jigsaws cast by a hundred dim lanterns decorating the tips of antennae or the latches of access panels or mounted as porch lights around the edges of half-forgotten emergency airlocks. Sengupta had turned them all on and maxed them all out but they were waypoints, not searchlights: they didn’t so much illuminate the darkness as throw it into contrast. 
    No matter. Her drone didn’t need light to see.
    She’d eschewed the usual maintenance ’bots that crawled spiderlike along the hull, patching and probing and healing the scars left by micrometeorites. Too obvious, she’d said. Too easy to hack. Instead she’d built one from scratch, remote-printed it on the fabricator still humming away in the refitted Hold: decompiled one of the standard bots for essential bits of lanthanum and thulium and built the rest from the Crown’s matter stockpile like Yahweh breathing life into clay. Now it made its painstaking way over a landscape of struts and conduits, shadows and darkness overlaid with false-color maps on a dozen wavelengths.
    “There!” Sengupta cried for the fourth time in as many hours, and then “Fuck.” 
    Just another pocket of outgassing. By now Brüks had learned not to worry about the myriad leaks in the hull. The Crown of Thorns was a sieve. Most ships were. Fortunately the holes in that mesh were pretty small: it would take years for the internal air pressure to decline significantly, barring a direct hit from anything larger than a lentil. They’d die of starvation or radiation sickness long before they had to worry about asphyxiation.
    “Felching hell another leak I swear...” Sengupta’s voice trailed off, rebooted: “Wait a second...”
    The telltales looked the same to Brüks: the faintest wisp of yellow on infrared, the kind of heat a few million molecules might retain for a moment or two after bleeding out from some warmer core. “Looks like more microgassing to me. Smaller than that last one, even.”
    “Yeah but look where it is.”
    Along one of the batwing struts where the droplet radiator sprouted from the spine. “So?”
    “No atmo there no tanks or lines either.”
    One long arm swept through the near distance, like the candle-lit vane of a skeletal windmill. Another.
    Sengupta played with herself. Her marionette picked a careful route through dark jumbled topography. Something hunkered on the hull ahead, its visible outlines buried in shadow. Infrared showed nothing but that diaphanous micronebula dissipating across the hull.
    Can’t cloak thermal emissions, Brüks remembered. Not if you’re an endotherm. “That’s not enough of a heat trace—”
    “Not if you’re a cockroach. Plenty big enough if you can shut yourself off for a few decades...”
    “Just LIDAR it.”
    Sengupta jerked her head back and forth. “No chance nothing active there could be tripwires.”
    It can’t be her, Brüks told himself. I saw her burn...“What about StarlAmp?” he wondered.
    “I’m using StarlAmp we just gotta get closer.”
    “But if she’s tripwired against active sensors—”
    “Proximity alert I know”—Sengupta nodded and tapped and kept her eyes on the prize— “but that would be active too and I could pick it up. Plus I’m hiding a lot.”
    She was: the ’bot’s eye saw struts and plating more often than shadows within shadows. Sengupta was keeping her head down on approach. At the moment they could see nothing but the looming face of some small grated butte dead ahead.
    “Right around the corner now this should do it.”
    The drone farted hydrogen and drifted gently out of eclipse. Still nothing but faint amorphous yellow on infrared.
    On StarlAmp, though: a silver body, legs straight arms spread, wired against the side of the ship. Boosted photons rendered the body in fragments: ridges of mirrored fabric glinting in thousand-year-old starlight, creases that swallowed any hint of mass or structure. The spacesuit was a patchwork of bright strips and dark absences, the shell of some tattered mummy with half its bandages ripped away and nothing at all underneath. But the right shoulder shone pale and clear: the double-E crest boasting the unsurpassed quality of Extreme Environments, Inc., protective gear; a name tag, programmable for the easy identification of multiple users.
    LUTTERODT.
    It can’t be, Brüks thought. I saw her, she was dead, her faceplate was in pieces. She was not unconscious. She was not stunned. That was not her I saw pounding on the hatch, awake again, running for her life, too frantic to notice that she’d awakened in someone else’s suit. It was not Lianna we left to burn, it was Valerie. It was Valerie. We abandoned no others who were not already dead.
    We did not do this.
    Sengupta was making noises somewhere between laughter and hysteria: “I told you I told you I told you.
    “Not stupid at all. She knows what she’s doing.”
    Out there all this time, Brüks thought. Hiding. I would never have found her. I would never have even looked.
    Maybe Portia’s hiding, too. Maybe I just haven’t looked hard enough. 
    “We have to tell Jim,” he said.
     
    <#>
    
    “Will you look at that,” Moore remarked. 
    Lianna’s spacesuit flickered on the dome, a snapshot taken before Sengupta had pulled the drone back for fear of setting off alarms. Not that a live feed would have been any more dynamic.
    “It’s Valerie it’s fucking Valerie—”
    “Apparently.”
    It can’t be, Brüks thought for the thousandth time, the voice in his head weaker with each iteration. By now it was barely whispering.
    “I told you we can’t trust—”
    “She seems harmless enough for now,” the Colonel remarked.
    “Harmless are you felching crazy don’t you remember what she—”
    Moore cut her off: “There’s no way that suit could support an active metabolism all the way back to Earth and there’s no sign of any kind of octopus rig. She’s gone undead for the trip home. Probably expects to revive and jump ship when we dock in LEO. Waking up earlier wouldn’t accomplish anything except using up her O2.”
    “Good then I say we give the bot some teeth and go scrape her off the hull like a goddamn barnacle while we got the chance.”
    “By all means, if you think she hasn’t set up any defenses against just that scenario. If you’re certain the hull isn’t booby-trapped with a nanogram of antimatter set to blow a hole in the ship if anything disturbs her. I assumed you realized that she’s smart. You certainly pulled your drone back fast enough.”
    That gave her pause. “Whadda we do then?”
    “She’s waiting for us to dock. So we don’t dock.” Moore shrugged. “We jump ship and let the Crown burn up on reentry.”
    “And then what surf back through the atmosphere on top of a passing comsat? If I was supposed to pack a shuttle nobody told me.”
    “One thing at a time. For now, just continue your hull crawl in case she’s left anything else out there for us to find. If you’ll excuse me”—he drifted around his own axis and pushed himself off the deck—“I have my own work to do.”
    He disappeared into the attic. Brüks and Sengupta stayed at the mirrorball. Buried in the shadows of some obscure province on the hull, Valerie lay still as death in her stolen skin.
    “What does she want?” Brüks wondered.
    “What all of them want I guess to touch the Face of God.”
    The common enemy, he remembered. “That whole enemy-of-my-enemy thing went down the toilet the moment she slaughtered the Bicams. Whatever it was, she wanted sole access.”
    “She’s got plans for God oh yah they all did. Too bad God had plans for them, too.”
    Maybe she wasn’t happy just touching the Face of God, he mused. Maybe she wants to bring God home as a pet. Maybe, while we’ve been going crazy looking for Portia in here, it’s been out there all along sealed up in a ziplock bag.
    Another good reason to burn this fucking ship. As if we needed one.
    “Whatever those plans were,” he said, “they’re all dead in the water now.”
    “Oh you think so huh?”
    “Jim’s—”
    “Oh Jim that’s a good one. Because vampires are no match for roach plans are they? So how did she get out then in the first place huh? How come she isn’t still strapped to a chair solving puzzles at SFU?”
    Every vampire ever brought back from the junkyard: scrupulously isolated from their own kind, every aspect of their environment regulated and monitored. Hemmed in by crosses and right angles, mortally dependent on precisely rationed drugs to keep them from seizing at the sight of a windowpane. Creatures that, for all their terrifying strength and intelligence, couldn’t even open their eyes on a city street without keeling over.
    Valerie, walking blithely out of her cage one night and scaring the piss out of prey in a local bar for chrissakes and then walking back in again, just to show that she could.
    “I don’t know,” Brüks admitted.
    “I do.” A single, jerky nod. “It wasn’t just her there were others there were three other vampires in that lab and they worked together.”
    He shook his head. “They’d never have met. Vampires are hardly ever allowed in the same wing of a building at the same time, let alone the same room. And if they did meet they’d be more likely to tear out each other’s throats than draw up escape plans.”
    “Oh they drew up their plans all right they all just did it alone.” 
    Brüks felt a contradiction rising on his tongue. Then it sunk in.
    “Shit,” he said.
    “Yah.”
    “You’re saying they just knew what the others were going to do. They just—”
    “Elevated respiration from the short redhead prey consistent with conspecific encounter within the past two hundred breaths,” Sengupta chanted. “East south corridors public so exclude them; conspecific must have been moved twenty meters along the north tunnel no more than one hundred twenty five breaths ago. Like that.”
    Each observing the most insignificant behavioral cues, the subtlest architectural details as their masters herded them from lab to cell to conference room. Each able to infer the presence and location of the others, to independently derive the optimal specs for a rebellion launched by X individuals in Y different locations at Z time. And then they’d acted in perfect sync, knowing that others they’d never met would have worked out the same scenario. 
    “How do you know?” he whispered.
    “It’s the only way I tried to make it work from every other angle but it’s the only model that fits. You roaches never stood a chance.”
    Jesus, Brüks thought.
    “Pretty good hack right?” Admiration mingled with the fear in Sengupta’s voice. “Can you imagine what those fuckers could do if they actually could stand to be in the same room together?”
    He shook his head, amazed, trying to take it in. “That’s why we made sure they couldn’t.”
    “Made? I thought they were just you know. Really territorial.”
    “Nobody’s that territorial. Someone must’ve amped their responses to keep them from ganging up on us.” Brüks shrugged. “Like the Crucifix Glitch, only—deliberate.”
    “How do you know that I haven’t seen that anywhere.”
    “Like you said, Rak: it’s the only the model that fits. How do you think the line could even breed if their default response was to eviscerate each other on sight? Call it the, the Divide and Conquer Glitch.” He smiled bitterly. “Oh, we were good.”
    “They’re better,” Sengupta said. “Look I don’t care how helpless Carnage thinks that thing is I’m not taking my fucking eyes off it. And I’m firewalling every onboard app and every subroutine I can find until I check every last one for logic bombs.”
    Now there’s a quick weekend project. Aloud: “Anything else?”
    “I don’t know I’m working on it but how do I know she hasn’t already figured everything I could think of? No matter what I do I could be playing right into her hands.” 
    “Well, for starters,” Brüks suggested, “what about welding the airlocks shut? You can’t hack sheet metal.”
    Sengupta took her eyes off the horizon, turned her head. For a moment Brüks even thought she might look at him.
    “When it’s time to leave, we cut a hole,” he continued. “Or blow one. I assume this isn’t a rental. If it is, I’m pretty sure the damage deposit’s already a write-off.”
    He waited for the inevitable put-down.
    “That’s a great idea,” Sengupta said at last. “Brute-force baseline thinking shoulda thought of it myself. Fuck safety protocols. I’ll do the hold and the spokes you do the attic.”
    
    <#>
    
    The docking hatch wouldn’t take a weld: it was too reactive, its reflexes almost the stuff of living systems. Clenched tight it could withstand the point-blank heat of lasers and still dilate on command like a dark-adjusting eye. Brüks had to make do with bulkhead panels from the attic, strip them from their frames and weld them into place across the airlock’s inner wall.
    Jim Moore appeared at his side, wordlessly helped him maneuver the panels into place. “Thanks,” Brüks grunted.
    Moore nodded. “Good idea. Although you could probably fab a better—”
    “We’re keeping it low-tech. In case Valerie hacked the fabbers.”
    “Ah.” The Colonel nodded. “Rakshi’s idea, I’m guessing.”
    “Uh-huh.”
    Moore held the panel steady at one end while Brüks set the focus. “Serious trust issues, that one. Doesn’t like me at all.”
    “You can’t really blame her, given the way you folks—manipulated her.” Brüks lined up the keyhole, fired. Down at the tip of the welder, metal flared bright as a sun with an electrical snap; but the lensing field damped that searing light down to a candle flame. The tang of metal vapor stung Brüks’s sinuses.
    “I don’t think she knows about that,” Moore said mildly. “And that wasn’t me in any case.”
    “Someone like you, anyway.” Aim. Fire. Snap. 
    “Not necessarily.”
    Brüks looked up from the weld. Jim Moore stared back impassively.
    “Jim, you told me how it works. Herded into the service of agendas they’d never support in a thousand years, remember? Somebody thought that up.”
    “Maybe. Maybe not.” Moore’s eyes focused on some spot just past Brüks’s left shoulder.
    You’re barely even here, Brüks thought. Even now, half of you is caught up in some kind of—séance...
    “There’s a whole other network out there,” Moore was saying. “Orthogonal to all the clouds, interacting with them like—I don’t know, the way dark matter interacts with baryonic matter maybe. Weak effects, and subtle. Very tough to trace, but omnipresent. Ideally suited for the kind of tweaks we use to marshal our forces, as we like to say. And do you know what’s really remarkable about it, Daniel?”
    “Tell me.”
    “As far as we know, nobody built the damn thing. We just discovered it. Turned it to our own ends. The theorists say it could just be an emergent property of networked social systems. Like your wife’s supraconscious networks.”
    “Uh-huh,” Brüks said after a moment.
    “You don’t buy it.”
    He shook his head. “A stealth supernet fine-tuned for the manipulation of pawns with a specific skill set suited to military applications. And it just emerged?”
    Moore smiled faintly. “Of course. No complex finely tuned system could ever just evolve. Something must have created it.”
    Ouch, Brüks thought.
    “I’ll admit I’ve heard that argument before,” Moore said. “I just never thought I’d hear it from a biologist.”
    Evidently half of him was enough.
     
     <tepi>An instrument has been developed in advance of the needs of its possessor 
     <teps>—Alfred Russell Wallace
    
    He awoke to the sound of jagged breathing. Shadows moved across the skin of his tent.
    “Rak?”
    The flap split down the middle. She crawled inside like some heartbroken infant returning to the womb. Even in here, cheek to jowl, she would not look at his face; she squirmed around and lay down with her back to him, curled up, fists clenched.
    “Uh...,” Brüks began.
    “I told you I didn’t like him I never did and now look,” Sengupta said softly. “We can’t trust him roach, I never really liked him but you could count on him at least you knew where he stood. Now he’s just—gone all the time. Don’t know what he is anymore.”
    “He lost his son. He blames himself. People deal with it in different ways.”
    “It’s more than that he lost his kid years ago.”
    “But then he got him back. In a small way, for a little while. Can you imagine what that must be like—to, to deal with the loss of someone you loved only to find out that they’re still out there somewhere, and they’re talking and it doesn’t matter if they’re talking to you or not it’s still them, it’s new, you’re not just playing a sim or wallowing in the same old video she’s actually out there and—”
    He caught himself, and wondered if she’d noticed.
    I could have her back, he told himself. Not in the flesh maybe, not here in the real world but real time at least, better than this thin graveside monologue Jim clings to. All I have to do is knock on Heaven’s door...
    Which was, of course, the one thing he’d sworn to never do.
    “He says Siri’s alive,” Sengupta whispered. “Says he’s coming home.”
    “Maybe he is. That clip from the transmission, right near the beginning, you know? The coffin.” 
    She ran her finger across the inside of the tent. Words wrote themselves in her wake: Point of view matters: I see that now, blind, talking to myself, trapped in a coffin falling past the edge of the solar system.
    Brüks nodded. “That’s the one. If you take that at face value, he’s not on board Theseus anymore.”
    “Lifeboat,” Sengupta said. “Shuttle.”
    “Sounds like he’s coasting in. It’ll take him forever, but there’ll be a hibernaculum on board.” He rested a hand on her shoulder. “Maybe Jim’s not wrong: maybe his son’s coming home.”
    He lay there, breathing in the scent of oil and mold and plastic and sweat, watching his breath ruffle her hair. 
    “Something’s coming,” she said at last. “Maybe not Siri.”
    “Why do you say that?”
    “It just sounds wrong the way it talks there are these tics in the speech pattern it keeps saying Imagine you’re this and Imagine you’re that and it sounds so recursive sometimes it sounds like it’s trying to run some kind of model...”
    Imagine you’re Siri Keeton, he remembered. And gleaned from a later excerpt of the same signal: Imagine you’re a machine.
    “It’s a literary affectation. He’s trying to be poetic. Putting yourself in the character’s head, that kind of thing.”
    “Why do you have to put yourself in your own head though eh why do you have to imagine what it’s like to be you?” She shook her head, a sharp little jerk of denial. “All those splines and filters and NCAs they take out so much you know, you can’t hear the words without them but you can’t hear the voice unless you strip them away. So I went back through all the steps I looked for some sweet spot where you might be able to hear and I don’t know if I did the signal’s so weak and there’s so much fucking noise but there’s this one little spot forty-seven minutes in where you can’t make out the words but you can sort of make out the voice, I can’t be sure you can never be sure but I think the harmonics are off.”
    “Off how?”
    “Siri Keeton’s male I don’t think this is male.”
    “A woman’s voice?”
    “Maybe a woman. If we’re lucky.”
    “What are you saying, Rakshi? You’re saying it might not be human?”
    “I don’t know I don’t know but it just feels wrong and what if it’s not a—a literary affectation what if it’s some kind of simulation? What if something out there is literally trying to imagine what it’s like to be Siri Keeton?”
    “The voice of God,” Brüks murmured. 
    “I don’t know I really don’t. But whatever it is it’s got its hooks into a professional killer with a zombie switch in his brain. And I don’t know why but I know a hack a when I see one.”
    “How could it know enough to hack him? How would it even know he exists?”
    “It must’ve known Siri and Siri knew him. Maybe that’s enough.”
    “I don’t know,” he admitted after a bit. “Hacking a human mind over a six-month time lag, it seems—”
    “That’s enough touching,” she said.
    “What?”
    She shrugged his hand off her shoulder. “I know you gerries like to touch and have meat sex and everything but the rest of us don’t need people to get us off if you don’t mind. I’ll stay here but it doesn’t mean anything okay?”
    “Uh, this is my—”
    “What?” she said, facing away.
    “Nothing.” He settled back down, maneuvered his back against the wall of the tent. It left maybe thirty centimeters between them. He might even be able to sleep, if neither of them rolled over.
    If he felt the least bit tired.
    Rakshi wasn’t sleeping either, though. She was scratching at her own commandeered side of the tent, bringing up tiny light shows on the wall: a little animatic of the Crown, centered on the rafters where MOORE, J. clung to a ghost, or danced on the strings of some unknowable alien agenda, or both; the metal landscape the drone traversed in search of countermeasures; the merest smudge of infrared where a sleeping monster hid in the shadows. There really weren’t any safe places, Brüks reflected. Might as well feign what safety you could in numbers. The company of a friend, the warmth of a pet, it was all the same; all that mattered was the simple brain-stem comfort of a body next to yours, huddled against the night.
    Sengupta turned her face a little: a cheekbone, the tip of a nose in partial eclipse. “Roach?”
    “I really wish you’d stop calling me that.”
    “What you said before, about losing people. Different people deal in different ways that’s what you said right?”
    “That’s what I said.”
    “How do you deal?”
    “I—” He didn’t quite know how to answer. “Maybe the person you lose comes back, someday. Maybe someday someone else fits into the same space.”
    Sengupta snorted softly, and there was an echo of the old derision there: “You just sit around and wait?”
    “No, I—get on with my life. Do other things.” Brüks shook his head, vaguely irritated. “I suppose you’d just whip up some customized ConSensus playmate—”
    “Don’t you fucking tell me what I’d do.”
    Brüks bit his lip. “Sorry.”
    Stupid old man. You know where the hot buttons are and still you can’t help pushing the damn things.
    There was a bright side, though, to Colonel Carnage’s deepening insanity, to Valerie’s lethal waiting games, to ghosts haunting the ether and uncertain fates waiting to pounce: at least Rakshi wasn’t hunting him anymore. He wondered at that thought, a little surprised at Sengupta’s place atop his own personal hierarchy of fear. She was just a human being, after all. Unarmed flesh and blood. She wasn’t some prehistoric nightmare or alien shapeshifter, no god or devil. She was just a kid—a friend even, insofar as she could even think in those terms. An innocent who didn’t even know his secret. Who was Rakshi Sengupta, next to monsters and cancers and a whole world on the brink? What was her grudge, next to all these other terrors closing in on all sides?
    It was a rhetorical question, of course. Sure the universe was full of terrors.
    She was the only one he’d brought upon himself.
    
    <#>
    
    His own hunt wasn’t going so well.
    Of course, Portia wasn’t quite so visible a target as Daniel Brüks. Brüks couldn’t subsist on the ambient thermal energy of bulkhead atoms vibrating at room temperature, couldn’t flatten himself down to paper and wrap himself around a water pipe to mask even that meager heatprint. He’d wondered about albedo or spectro, wondered if a probe built of very short wavelengths might be able to pick up the diffraction gratings that Portia used to talk—perhaps it used them as camouflage as well—but the improvised detectors he fabbed turned up nothing. Which didn’t mean they didn’t work, necessarily. Maybe it only meant that Portia kept to the Crown’s infinite fractal landscape of holes and crannies too small for bots and men.
    He was almost certain it couldn’t launch an open attack without letting some tell slip beforehand: the heat signature of muscle analogs building a charge, the reallocation of mass sufficient to construct an appendage at some given set of coordinates. It could run, though, in some sort of postbiological baseline state, powered by the subtle energy resonating from the crude mass of the real substrate into the superconducting intelligence of the false one. It could think and plan forever in that mode, if Bicameral calculations had been right. It could hide. 
    The less he found, the more he feared. Something nearby was watching him; he felt it in his gut.
    “Ship’s too damn noisy,” he confided to Sengupta. “Thermally, allometrically. Portia could be anywhere, everywhere. How would we know?”
    “It’s not,” she told him.
    “Why so sure? You were the one who warned me, back when—”
    “I thought it might have got in yeah. Maybe it did. But not enough to get everywhere it didn’t coat everything. It didn’t swallow us.”
    “How do you know?”
    “It wanted to keep us in Icarus. It wouldn’t have tried to stop us from leaving if we were still inside it. It’s not everywhere.”
    He thought. “It could still be anywhere.”
    “Yah. But not enough to take over, just a—a little bit. Lost and alone.”
    There was something in her voice. Almost like sympathy. 
    “Yah well why not?” she asked, although he had said nothing. “We know how that feels.”
    
    <#>
    
    Sailing up the center of the spine, navigating through the grand rotating bowl of the southern hemisphere, up through the starboard rabbit hole with the mirrorball gleaming to his left: Daniel Brüks, consummate parasite, finally at home in the weightless intestines of the Crown of Thorns. “I checked the numbers three times. I don’t think Portia—”
    He stopped. His own face looked down at him across half the sky.
    Oh fuck—
    Rakshi Sengupta was a presence near the edge of vision, a vague blur of motion and color more felt than seen. He had only to turn his head and she would come into focus.
    She knows she knows she knows—
    “I found the fucker,” she said, and there was blood and triumph and terrible promise in her voice. He could not bring himself to face her. He could only stare at that incriminating portrait in front of him, at his personal and professional lives scrolling across the heavens big as the zodiac: transcripts, publications, home addresses; Rhona, ascendant; his goddamn swimming certificate from the third grade.
    “This is him. This is the asshole who killed my—who killed seven thousand four hundred eighty two people. Daniel. Brüks.”
    She was no longer talking like Rakshi Sengupta, he realized at some horrible remove. She was talking like someone else entirely. 
    “I said I would find him. And I found him. And here. He. Is.”
    She’s talking like Shiva the fucking Destroyer.
    He floated there, dead to rights, waiting for some killing blow.
    “And now that I know who he is,” Shiva continued, “I am going to survive that thing on the hull and I am going to survive that thing in Colonel Carnage’s head and I am going to make it back to Earth. And I will hunt this fucker down and make him wish he had never been born.”
    Wait, what—?
    He forced back his own paralysis. He turned his head. His pilot, his confidante, his sworn nemesis came into focus. Her face, raised to the heavens, crawled with luminous reflections of his own damnation.
    She spared him a sidelong glance; her lips were parted in a smile that would have done Valerie proud. “Want to come along for the ride?”
    She’s toying with me? This is some kind of twisted— 
    “Uh, Rakshi—” He coughed, cleared a throat gone drier than Prineville, tried again. “I don’t know—”
    She raised one preemptive hand. “I know, I know. Priorities. Counting chickens. We have other things to do. But I’ve had friends wiped by the storm troopers for hacking some senator’s diary, and then this asshole racks up a four-digit death toll and those same storm troopers protect him, you know what I mean? So yah, there are vampires and alien slime molds and a whole damn planet coming apart at the seams but I can’t do anything about that.” Her gaze on the ground, she pointed to the sky. “This I can do something about.”
    You don’t know who I am. I’m right here in front of you and you’ve dredged up my whole sorry life and you’re not putting it together how can you not be putting it together?
    “Bring back a little balance into the social equation.”
    Maybe it’s the eye contact thing. He suppressed a hysterical little giggle. Maybe she just never looked at me in meatspace...
    “There’s no fucking justice anywhere, unless you make your own.” 
    Wow, Brüks thought, distantly amazed. Jim and his orthogonal networks. They really got your number.
    Why don’t you have mine?
    
    <#>
    
    “What did they do to her? Why doesn’t she know me?”
    “Do...?” Moore shook his head, managed a half smile under listless eyes. “They didn’t do anything, son. Nobody does anything, we’re done to...”
    The lights were always low in the attic, the better for Moore to see the visions in his head. He was a half-seen half-human shape in the semidarkness, one arm tracing languid circles in the air, all other limbs entwined among the rafters. As though the Crown was incorporating him into her very bones, as though he were some degenerate parasitic anglerfish in conjugal fusion with a monstrous mate. The smell of old sweat and pheromones hung around him like a shroud.
    “She found out about Bridgeport,” Brüks hissed. “She found out about me, she had all my stats right up there on the screen and she didn’t recognize me.”
    “Oh that,” Moore said, and nothing else.
    “This goes way beyond some tweak to protect state secrets. What did they do? What did you do?”
    Moore frowned, an old man losing track of seconds barely past. “I—I didn’t do anything. This is the first I’ve heard of it. She must have a filter.”
    “A filter.”
    “Cognitive filter.” The Colonel nodded, intact procedural memories booting up over corrupt episodic ones. “Selectively interferes with the face-recognition wetware in the fusiform gyrus. She sees you well enough in the flesh, she just can’t recognize you in certain...contexts. Triggers an agnosia. Probably even mangles the sound of your name...”
    “I know what a cognitive filter is. What I want to know is why someone took explicit measures to keep Rakshi from recognizing me when nobody knew I was going to be on this goddamn ship. Because I just happened to go on sabbatical just before a bunch of postals decided to duke it out in the desert, right? Because I just happened to be in the wrong place at the wrong time.”
    “I was wondering when you were going to figure that out,” Moore said absently. “I thought maybe someone had spiked your Cognital.”
    Brüks hit him in the face.
    At least he tried to. Somehow the blow went wide; somehow Moore was just a little left of where he’d been an instant before and his fist was ramming like a piston into Brüks’s diaphragm. Brüks sailed backward; something with too many angles and not enough padding cracked the back of his skull. He doubled over, breathless, floaters swarming in his head.
    “Unarmed biologist with no combat experience attacking a career solder with thirty years in the field and twice your mitochondrial count,” Moore remarked as Brüks struggled to breathe. “Not generally a good idea.”
    Brüks looked across the compartment, holding his stomach. Moore looked back through eyes that seemed a bit more focused in the wake of his outburst.
    “How far back, Jim? Did they drop some subliminal cue into my in-box to make me choose Prineville? Did they make me fuck up the sims and kill all those people just so I’d feel the urge to get lost for a while? Why did they want me along for the ride anyway, what possible reason could a bunch of superintelligent cancers have for taking a cockroach on their secret mission?”
    “You’re alive,” Moore said. “They’re not.”
    “Not good enough.”
    “We’re alive, then. The closer you are to baseline, the better your odds of surviving the mission.”
    “Tell that to Lianna.”
    “I wouldn’t have to. I’ve told you before, Daniel: roach isn’t an insult. We’re the ones still standing after the mammals build their nukes, we’re the ones with the stripped-down OS’s so damned simple they work under almost any circumstances. We’re the goddamned Kalashnikovs of thinking meat.”
    “Maybe it wasn’t the Bicams at all,” Brüks said. “Maybe I’m Sengupta’s paycheck. That’s how you operate, isn’t it? You trade in ideology, you exploit passion. Sengupta does her job and you remove the blinders and let her loose to take her revenge.”
    “That’s not it,” Moore told him softly.
    “How do you know? Maybe you’re just out of the loop, maybe those orthogonal stealthnets are running you the way you think you’re running Rakshi. You think everyone on the planet’s a puppet except for Colonel Jim Moore?”
    “Do you really think that’s a likely scenario?”
    “Scenario? I don’t even know what the goddamned goal is! No matter who’s pulling the strings, what have we accomplished other than nearly getting killed a hundred fifty million klicks from home?”
    Moore shrugged. “God knows.”
    “Oh, very clever.”
    “What do you want from me, Daniel? I’m not much more clued in than you are, no matter what Machiavellian motives you want to lay at my feet. The Bicamerals see God in everything from the Virgo Supercluster to a flushing toilet. Who knows why they might want us on board? And as for Rakshi’s filter—how do you know your own people didn’t do it?”
    “My own people?”
    “Public Relations. Faculty Affairs. Whatever your academic institutions use to keep their dirty laundry out of the public eye. They did a lot of mopping up after Bridgeport; how do you know Rakshi’s tweak wasn’t just another bit of insurance? Preemptive damage control, as it were?”
    “I—” He didn’t actually. The thought hadn’t even occurred to him.
    “Still doesn’t explain why we both ended up on the same mission,” he said at last.
    “Why.” The Colonel snorted softly. “We’re lucky if we even know what we’ve done. Any why simple enough for either of us to consciously understand would certainly be wrong.”
    “Just not enough room in the cache,” Brüks said bitterly.
    Moore inclined his head.
    “So it’s just God’s will. All these augments and all this technology and four hundred years of so-called enlightenment and you still just come around to God’s will.”
    “For all we know,” Moore said, “your presence on the mission is the last thing God wants. Maybe that’s the whole point.”
    Sengupta’s voice in his head: Maybe worship. Maybe disinfect.
    Lazily, almost indifferently, Jim Moore disentangled himself from the rafters and moved spiderlike around the attic. Even in this artificial twilight Brüks could see the slow change in his eyes, the focus deepening in stages: into Brüks’s eyes, then past them; through the bulkhead, through the hull; past planets and ecliptics, past dwarfs and comets and transNeptunians, all the way out to some invisible dark giant lurking between the stars.
    He’s gone again, he thought, but not entirely: Moore dropped that distant gaze from Brüks’s face, took his hand, pointed to a freckle there that Brüks hadn’t noticed before.
    “Another tumor,” Brüks said, and Moore nodded distantly:
    “The wrong kind.”
    
    <#>
    
    The sun diminished behind them; they jettisoned the parasol. Ahead, just a few degrees starboard, the Earth grew from dimensionless point to gray dot, edging infinitesimally closer to twelve o’clock with each arbitrary shipboard day. The solar wind no longer roared across every frequency; it spat and hissed and gave way to other voices, infinitely weaker but so much closer to the ear. Jim Moore continued to feed on the archives that carried his son; Sengupta squeezed signal from noise and insisted that other patterns lay embedded there, if she could only decipher them. 
    But the ghost that called itself Siri Keeton was only one voice on the ether. There were others. Far too many for Brüks’s liking.
    The world they’d left behind had been almost voiceless, scared into silence by the memory of regimented apparitions burning in the sky. But the voices were coming back, now: the rapid-fire click-trains of encrypted data; grainy approximations of faces and landscapes flickering along the six-hundred megahertz band; the hiss of carrier waves on reawakened frequencies, nominally active but holding their tongues as if waiting for the firing of some starting pistol. A myriad languages; a myriad messages. Weather reports, newsfeeds rotten with static, personal calls connecting families scattered across continents. The content of the signals wasn’t nearly so troubling as their very existence, out here in the unshielded wastes. They should have been trapped in lasers and fiberop, should have been winking confidentially between lines of sight. These, these broadcasts were relics of another age. The airtight machinery of twenty-first century telecommunications had begun leaking at the seams; people were falling back into more patchwork technologies.
    It was what a brain might do, stunted for want of nutrients and oxygen. It was the predictable decoherence of any complex system starved of energy.
    But it was home, and they were almost there. There was groundwork to be laid; Moore and Sengupta attended to the details, each returning from whatever far-off places they ventured when not guiding the Crown into port. The warrior divided the rest of his time between his tent and the attic; the widow continued to sleep obliviously with the enemy. The vampire lay like a fossil on the hull, undisturbed by whatever alarms or tripwires she might have put in place. Brüks measured the time to Earth by the size of its disk and the incremental unclenching of his own gut. He thought about getting back into gaming, briefly. He slept and dreamt his lucid dreams, but Rhona would not come to him and he no longer had the heart to seek her out. The guts of the Crown continued to not grow tentacles.
    He finished the last of the Glenmorangie by himself, toasting his lab bench while they crossed lunar orbit. If anyone even noticed their return, they were too busy to send a welcoming committee.
     <tepi>To travel hopefully is a better thing than to arrive. 
     <teps>—Robert Louis Stevenson
    
    Low fast orbit over a world in flames.
    A thousand cool political conflicts had turned hot while they’d been away. Twice as many epidemiological and environmental ones. A myriad voices cried out on long-forgotten radio bands from kilohertz to giga, tightbeams swamped, planetary gag orders rescinded or forgotten. The O’Neils were under quarantine. The space elevator had collapsed; burning wreckage still fell from orbit, wrought untold havoc along a splatter cone wrapped around a third of the equator. Jet-stream geoengineering had finally buckled beneath the weight of an insatiable atmosphere. Atlas had lost the strength to hold the heavens from the earth; atmospheric sulfates were plummeting and firestorms sparkled endlessly across six continents. Pretoria, Bruges, a hundred other cities had been overrun by zombies, millions reduced to fight/flight/fuck and the authorities weren’t even trying to control anything inside the hot zones. There was no end to the claims or the confusion. Icarus had fallen. The Fireflies had returned. The invasion had begun. The Realists had struck. The Bicamerals had destroyed the world. 
    Moore listened to the tsunami along with Brüks and Sengupta—all three of them strapped into the mirrorball on approach—and his face was impassive as a corpse’s. This is your doing, Brüks did not say. This was a world just making ends meet until you snatched away its biggest asset. All those millions kept barely watered by power-hungry desalinators; all those uprisings kept barely in check by the threat of institutional force; all those environmental catastrophes kept barely at bay by the sheer overwhelming application of brute-force technologies. Icarus carried a solid fifth of our civilization on its back: what did you think would happen when you threw it into the sun?
    Even Sengupta said nothing. There would have been no point. 
    Enemy territory. Couldn’t be helped.
    Maybe Moore was even right. The world had been simmering for over a century. It had always only been a matter of time before it boiled over. Maybe he hadn’t done anything but advance the schedule by a few months.
    “Got it,” Sengupta said. “Just came line of sight over the Aleutians whole lotta junk between there and here.”
    A tactical profile flashed up on the horizon: a cylinder ten meters across and maybe thirty long, a great broad corona of solar panels deployed from the starside end and a cluster of mouth parts—microwave emitters, from the look of them—jutting down from the other. It looked like an old-style powersat, albeit in a very strange orbit. Which was, of course, the whole idea.
    “Be tricky docking with that thing.” Off to one side  a simulacrum of the Crown lazily lowered its remaining arms—spread-eagled but already spun down—into lockdown position.
    “We don’t dock,” Moore reminded her. 
    “How long?” Brüks asked.
    “Thirty minutes, give or take. We should bottle up.”
    The attic was not designed to be a working environment during maneuvers but they’d made do, one survivor strapped into each of three suit alcoves directly across from the docking hatch. Brüks and Moore had welded it shut somewhere past Venus but it had been Sengupta who’d planted the thermite along those seams just six hours ago. There wasn’t much bulkhead to spare so Sengupta, still unwilling to let ConSensus into her head, had stripped the tool rack bare and slathered smart paint across the gecko boards. The microfibers fuzzed the image a little at high rez but the space was big enough to contain the windows she needed: radar profiles and trajectory overlays, engine vitals, throttles and brakes in shades of gold and emerald. A naked-eye view of Moore’s last ace up the sleeve, still posing a little too convincingly as decommissioned junk, swelling slowly against the deceptively blue-green crescent of a world falling into ever-greater depths of disrepair.
    In a dedicated window, stage right: Valerie, still tied to the mast. She hadn’t moved in weeks; and yet there was still a vague sense of lethality in that frozen body, a sense of something spring-loaded and biding its time.
    Its remaining time. Measured in minutes, now.
    A gentle nudge; a slow, steady pressure pushed Brüks against the side of the alcove. Over on the tool rack the Crown’s avatar turned one hundred eighty ponderous degrees around its center of mass and coasted on to retrograde.
    “Hang on,” Sengupta warned, and hit the brakes.
    Mutilated, amputated, cauterized, the ship groaned and ground down the delta-vee. Deceleration pushed Brüks against the floor of his alcove. He staggered; the harness held him up against this final encore performance of down. Moore touched some unseen control and out across the vacuum his chameleon satellite split at the seams like an exploding schematic: solar panels and radiator vanes came apart in puffs of vapor turned instantly to snow. The shell fell apart as if drawn and quartered; body parts sailed silently in all directions. A great arrowhead, aimed at the earth, floated exposed where the false skin had come apart. It glinted in the rising sun, its stubby wings iridescent as a dragonfly’s.
    Flying debris rattled across the Crown’s hull like a hail of pebbles. Moore waited until the shower had passed and hit the switch.
    Cracks of sunlight ignited around the hatch: the barrier there, welded shut, burned open and fell away. The hatch beyond dilated in an instant; a brief hurricane pulled the plating into space and Brüks toward the stars. The webbing held him fast for the moment it took Moore to snap the buckles. Then they were through and into a void silent but for the sound of fast harsh breathing, just this side of panic, filling Brüks’s helmet. The dark Earth spread out below: too convex for mere landscape, too vast and imminent to be a sphere. Weather systems laid dirty fingerprints across its face. Coastlines and continents shone like galaxies where civilization burned bright, flickered dull and intermittent orange where it had burned out.
    It was such a long way down.
    Sunlight turned the flotsam ahead into a blinding jigsaw, save for one brief instant when a great dark hand passed over the sun. Brüks flailed and turned to see the Crown of Thorns in passing, still huge in the sky, backlit against a risen sun and a bright spreading crescent. Her last frozen breath sparkled near the bow like a faint cloud of jewels.
    He could not see Valerie’s hiding place from here. 
    Something yanked at his leash. Brüks spun to heel, to the shuttle swelling in his sights amid its cloud of debris. “Focus,” Moore hissed over comm.
    “Sorry—”
    They tumbled forward, Moore in the lead, the others dragged behind. The shuttle’s hatch gaped just behind the wraparound cockpit window, like a frog’s eardrum cut away and folded back against the head. Some magical spray-on ablative made the hull shimmer with oily rainbows.
    A faint static of ice crystals whispered across Brüks’s helmet; then Moore was on the hull, dead on target, boots coming down between the edge of the hatch and a convenient handhold welded like a towel bar to the shuttle’s skin. His legs bent to absorb the impact; one gloved hand seized the handhold as if it had eyes of its own. Brüks sailed past overhead and splatted against the fuselage. He bounced, spun against the tether, grasped wildly at the recessed cone of some dormant maneuvering thruster just a few centimeters out of reach—finally felt his boots click home against the hull. 
    The Crown was well past and well below them now, drifting in a slow majestic tumble toward the terminator: forward momentum stalled, decelerating from the endless satellite fall around to the terminal incendiary fall into. Distance and the limits of vision had healed its scars. Now—torn apart, spliced back together, burned and broken—she looked almost pristine. You kept us alive, Brüks thought, and then: I’m sorry.
    Moore yanked him out of one moment and into the next, reeling Brüks and Sengupta in together like fish on a line. Brüks spared a moment to envy the pilot’s composure; she hadn’t made a sound, hadn’t even breathed hard during their fall across the endless chasm. Only now, peering into her faceplate, did he see her lips move below tightly clenched eyelids. Only now, bumped helmet to helmet, could he hear her incantation.
    “—oh fuck oh fuck oh fuck—”
    You little chickenshit. You turned off your comm...
    Moore bundled her through the open hatch. Brüks followed, pulling himself into the cabin: two racks, one behind the other, each holding six acceleration couches like a half dozen eggs in the carton. The couches themselves were squashed nearly flat, each bent just enough at the ass and the knees to avoid being classified as cots; the racks faced forward toward a pair of more conventional command chairs and a control horseshoe. Above those controls a visor of quartz glass ran around the front of the cockpit. No stars shone in that nose-down view; the world filled it from side to side, mostly dark, brightening to starboard.
    That was pretty much it. One hatch in the aft bulkhead and a smaller one in the deck, both sealed. The first might have led to a cargo hold—a very modest one, given the size of the vessel—but that hole in the deck couldn’t have led to anything more spacious than a service crawlway. Contingency orbital extraction, Moore had said. Emergency planetfall for soldiers stranded in the wake of failed missions. This wasn’t a shuttle: it was a glorified parachute to be used once and thrown away.
    Moore had sealed the hatch and pushed himself into one of the command chairs; Sengupta, recovered from her brief catatonia, fumbled into the other. Brüks strapped himself into one of the hamburger racks behind as their ride booted up. Outside sounds came back to him, faint as a whisper at first, barely audible above the breath of his helmet regulator and the murmured recitation of preflight checklists coming over comm. The hiss of compressed gas. Tiny clicks and beeps, muffled as if under pillows. The snap of ancient switches in their sockets.
    70 KPA, HUD reported. He unsealed his visor and slid it back: cold as a glacier in his lungs, the taste of plastic monomers at the back of his throat. Breathable, though.
    Moore twisted against his straps, couldn’t quite turn to line-of-sight. “Better keep that down. This bird’s been up here a while; could be some leaks.”
    For the first time Brüks focused his attention on the dashboard: single-function LEDs, rows of manual switches big enough for hands wrapped in Mylar and urethane. Tactical displays trapped in embedded panes of crystal, instead of flowing freely across whatever real estate the moment required. 
    He brought his visor back down. “This thing is ancient.”
    Moore grunted over comm. “Older it is, the better the odds everyone’s forgotten about it.”
    We’ve traded one derelict for another. Past the viewport something flared in the corner of Brüks’s eye: sunlight bouncing off a piece of orbital debris, maybe. Or perhaps the thrusters of some distant ship. But it burned too long for one and too low for the other, and the wrong color for either. When he turned to face it, squinting against the sun, he could almost swear he saw the core inside the contrail: a dark jagged patchwork coming apart in a line of fire etching its way across the face of the planet. Sticks and bones, turning to ash.
    “There she goes,” Moore said softly, and Brüks wasn’t quite sure whether he meant the monster or the machine.
    “Ignition,” Sengupta said, as they too began to fall.
    
<#>

    The Crown burned cleanly. Nothing escaped. No spacesuited figure roused itself at the last moment to leap miraculously free of the hull, although Sengupta’s camera watched it until the end. A limb may have twitched, just before the feed died—a brief flicker of consciousness passing through a body just long enough to sense that something had gone wrong with its best-laid plans—but even that could have been a trick of the light. The anticlimax left a guilty lump in Brüks’s throat. The ease with which they’d murdered Valerie somehow made her less of a threat in hindsight, stole the justification from their crime.
    He barely remembered their descent: frictional incandescence flickering across the windshield like sheet lightning; static hissing on every channel until he remembered to shut down his radio. Fragments, really. Disconnected images. At some point weight returned, stronger and steadier than it had been for a hundred years; racks and acceleration couches and a lone cockroach folded up into conventional sitting positions against a vibrating deck that Brüks could finally perceive as a floor. Then they were gliding in a wide spiral over a steely gray ocean and the sun had dropped back below the horizon. Something listed on the seascape below, glimpsed in split-second snatches as it slipped back and forth across the windshield: a half-submerged jump-ramp for water-skiers; a flooded parking lot; the disembodied corner of an aircraft carrier, flickering with Saint Elmo’s fire. Brüks got no sense of scale from this altitude, and after a few moments the ocean dropped from sight as Sengupta lifted the nose for final approach.
    Something kicked them hard from behind, threw Brüks forward against the harness and brought the nose down with a slap. Walls of white spray geysered just past the port, split down the centerline; an instant later the view shattered and dissolved behind sheets of water running down the quartz. Something punched the shuttle under the chin; it bucked back and screamed along its length like an eviscerated banshee. Now they were climbing again. Now they were slowing. Now they were still.
    Sheets of water contracted to runnels, to droplets. The shuttle squinted past them to a few fading stars in a steel sky. Way off to the left, almost past line-of-sight, something flickered in and out of view like a half-remembered dream. Some kind of antennae, perhaps. A wire-frame tree.
    Moore dislocated his helmet and let it roll to the deck. “Here we are.”
    
    <#>
    
    Someone had carved a landing strip out of thin air.
    It hung four or five meters above the waves, a scorched scarred tongue of alloy with the shuttle at its tip. It extended back to solid land like some kind of absurd diving board—except the substrate wasn’t land, and it wasn’t solid. It emerged from the ocean as gradually as a seashore; electric blue sidewinders writhed and sparked along the waterline, followed the swells as they surged up and down the slope. The surface seemed gray as cement in the predawn half-light, and almost as featureless except for the scored tracks the shuttle had left. But while it rose from the sea as unremarkably as a boat ramp at one end, it did not subside or drop off or reimmerse at the other: it just faded away, a massive slab of listing alloy big as a parking lot, segueing from solid undeniable opacity to spectral translucence to nothing at all over a distance of maybe a meter and a half.
    Except for this runway, freshly sculpted by the screaming friction of a hot landing.
    Moore had already shed his spacesuit and was standing on thin air, ten meters ahead of the grounded shuttle. Bitter gray swells marched past below his feet. Every couple of seconds a wire-frame structure flickered into existence nearby, towering six meters over his head and infested with parabolic antennae.
    Brüks leaned out the hatch and took it all in. The frigid Pacific wind blew through his jumpsuit as though he were naked. The earth pulled at him with a force he’d almost forgotten; his arms, bracing him against the bulkhead, seemed made of rubber.
    Sengupta poked him from behind. “Hurry up roach you never seen chromatophores before?”
    In fact, he had. Chroaks were basically just a subspecies of smart paint. But he’d never encountered one on this scale before. “How big is this thing?”
    “Pretty small only a klick across look you want to get off before the damn thing sinks the rest of the way?”
    He squatted, grabbed the lip of the hatch, clambered overboard. Gravity almost tipped him on the landing but he managed to keep his feet under him, stood swaying with one hand braced against the hull (still warm enough for discomfort, even after being soaked by an ocean). This close to the shuttle the cloak had been thoroughly scored away, but a half dozen uncertain steps took him onto a substrate clearer than glass. He looked down onto a wave-tossed sea, and fought the urge to flail his arms.
    Instead, he walked carefully toward Moore as Sengupta climbed down behind him. Flickering orange light caught his eye as he rounded the nose of the shuttle: fire in the near distance, a guttering line of flames atop an incongruous levitating patch of scorched earth. Brüks could make out superstructure silhouetted there: low flat-topped rectangles, a radio dome cracked open like an eggshell, the barely visible crosshatch of railings and fenceposts against the fire. Maybe something moving, ant-size with distance.
    Not your average gyland, this. Not a refugee camp or a city-state, no iffy commercial venture with a taste for the forgiving regulatory climate of International Waters. This was a place for Moore and his kind: a staging ground for covert military actions. A lookout on the high seas, patrolling the whole Northern Gyre. Clandestine. 
    Not clandestine enough, apparently.
    He shivered at Moore’s shoulder. “What happened here?”
    The Colonel shrugged. “Something convenient.”
    “How so?”
    “It’s been abandoned. We won’t have to talk our way in.”
    “Is it still plugged in? What if it—”
    Moore shook his head. “Shouldn’t be a problem. Nobody who’d have done this would care about Heaven.” He pointed at the distant flames. “That way.”
    Brüks turned as Sengupta came up behind them; the shuttle cooled in the background, half-melted ablative oozing like candle wax around its belly. “Huh,” he remarked. “I’d have thought there’d be, you know. Landing gear.”
    “Too expensive,” Moore told him. “Everything’s disposable.”
    You got that right.
    A halting, freezing hike up a shallow slope. A walk on the water. An invisible bridge to the visible tip of a derelict iceberg. Gutted structures spread out before them like little pieces of Gehenna, some still aflame, others merely smoldering. Finally they reached the visible edge of that levitating island: little more than a patina of black greasy soot floating in midair. It was still a relief to see something underfoot; it was a greater relief to stop and catch his breath.
    Moore laid a sudden hand on his shoulder. Sengupta said, “Wha—” and fell silent.
    Ahead, barely visible through a curtain of oily smoke, things moved.
    They’d arrived at what had once been some kind of air-traffic hub: a low-slung control shack whose walls and roof came together in a wraparound band of soot-stained windows angled at the sky. Two dead helicopters and a one-winged jump jet littered a scorched expanse of tarmac and landing bull’s-eyes, barely visible beneath the scoring. The nozzles of retracted fuel lines poked through the deck here and there; one burned fitfully, a monstrous candle or a fuse set to detonate whatever reservoir fed the flame. In the middle of it all, bodies moved.
    The bodies were human. Their movements were anything but.
    Moore waved the others back against the shack, spared a backward glance and a raised hand: Stay here. Brüks nodded. Moore slipped around the corner and disappeared.
    A swirling gust blew sparks and acrid smoke into Brüks’s face. He suppressed a cough, eyes stinging, and squinted through the haze. Human, yes. Two, maybe three, near the edge of one of the bull’s-eyes. Gray coveralls, blue uniform, insignia impossible to make out from this distance.
    They were dancing.
    At least, that was the closest word Brüks could summon to describe the tableaux: movements both inhumanly precise and inhumanly fast, humanoid simulacra engaged in some somatic call-and-response unlike anything he’d ever seen. There was a lead, but it kept changing; there were steps, but they never seemed to repeat. It was ballet, it was semaphore, it was some kind of conversation that engaged every part of the body except the tongue. It was utterly silent but for the machine-gun staccato of boots on the deck, faint and intermittent through the soft roar of the wind and the crackling of the flames.
    And faintly familiar, somehow.
    Moore ended it all with a blow to the back of the head. One moment the dancing marionettes were alone on the stage; the next the Colonel had materialized from the smoke, his hand already blurring toward the target. The gray-clad dancer jerked and thrashed and collapsed twitching onto the deck, a disconnected puppet gone suddenly grand mal; the other threw himself down at the same instant, although Moore hadn’t touched him. He lay twisting beside his fallen partner, still in frantic clockwork motion but only twitching now, amplitude reined in to complement these new and unexpected steps brought so suddenly into the routine.
    “Echopraxia echofuckingpraxia,” Sengupta hissed at his shoulder.
    Moore was back. “This way.” 
    A broken door gaped around the corner. Inside, brain-dead smart paint sparked and sizzled along those few control surfaces that hadn’t already been put to the flame.
    Brüks glanced over his shoulder. “What about—” 
    “They’re in a feedback loop. We don’t have to worry until the mechanic comes back.” A companionway gaped from the far bulkhead. A fallen cabinet blocked the way. Moore pushed it aside.
    “Isn’t that bad for them?” Brüks wondered, and immediately felt like an idiot. “I mean, wouldn’t it be better if we broke the loop? Split them up?”
    Moore paused at the top of the stairs. “Best-case scenario, they’d do as well as you would if someone split you down the middle.”
    “Oh.” After a moment: “Worst-case?”
    “They wake up,” Moore said, “and come after us.”
     <tepi>You can't go home again.
     <teps>—Thomas Wolfe
    
    They came across a sloping commons area, dark and derelict but for a cone of emergency light spilling in from the corridor and a smattering of icons winking fitfully from the far bulkhead: a row of comm cubbies, snoozing until some lonely grunt chose to phone home or eavesdrop on the happening world. They could only access Main Street—no windows into anything that might require security clearance—but ConSensus and perscomm links floated free to one and all, serenely untroubled by whatever small apocalypse that had taken out the upper deck. 
    Moore moved on in search of greater privilege and darker secrets. Sengupta hung around long enough to make sure the links were solid before disappearing in his wake. 
    Brüks sat in the leaning darkness and did not move.
    What do I say to her? What do I say?
    Hey, you know how Icarus went away and world fell apart? Funny story…
    You know how we thought there was no God? Well, it’s worse than you think…
    Hi, honey. I’m home.
    He took a deep breath.
    This is a stupid idea. We’re way past this. I should just—catch up with the others.
    Let it out again.
    Someone has to tell her. She needs to know.
    He felt the corners of his mouth pull back in a grimace of self-loathing.
    This isn’t even about her. This is about Dan Brüks and his imploding worldview. This is about running back to the only person who ever gave you any shred of comfort whether you deserved it or not… 
    He sacc’ed the interface.
    He tried four times before the system could even find the address; the lump in his throat grew with each attempt. The Quinternet was falling apart; everything was. But it had deep roots, old roots reaching back over a century: a design both completely uncephalized and massively redundant. Functionality in the face of overwhelming entropy had been built into its DNA from the start.
    
    <dis>LINK ESTABLISHED: WELCOME TO HEAVEN
    TIMMINS FRANCHISE
    VISITOR’S LOBBY
    
    Still there. Still online. Still alive. He hadn’t entirely believed it. “Uh, Rhona McLennan, November 13, 2086.”
    
    <dis>PINGING.
    
    Please pick up.
    
    <dis>PINGING
    
    Please be busy.
    
    <dis>PINGING
    
    “Dan.”
    Oh God. Here she is.
    I must be dreaming…
    “Hi, Rho.”
    “I wondered where you’d got off to. Things have been so confused out there lately...”
    She was a voice in the darkness, distant, disembodied. There was no visual.
    “I’m sorry I haven’t been in touch...”
    “I wasn’t expecting you to get in touch.” Maybe there was warmth in her voice, now. Wry amusement at least. “When was the last time you dropped by?”
    “You didn’t want me to drop by! You said—”
    “I said I wasn’t going to come back out, love. I said I didn’t want you to spend all our time together trying to change my mind.”
    He didn’t say anything.
    “I’m glad you did come by,” she said after a while. “It’s good to see you.”
    “I can’t see you,” he said softly.
    “Dan. What would be the point?”
    He shook his head.
    “Is it important? I could show you—something. If that would make it any easier.”
    “Rho, you can’t stay in there.”
    “I’m not having this argument again, Dan.”
    “This is not the same argument! Things have changed...”
    “I know. I’m in Heaven, not Andromeda. I can see everything out there that I want to. Upheaval, rebellion, environmental collapse. Plus ça change.”
    “It’s a loss worse since Icarus went down.”
    “Yeah,” she said slowly. “Icarus.”
    “Everything’s stretched to the breaking point, there’re outages and brownouts everywhere you look. Took me four tries to even find you, did you know that? And Heaven’s hardly the most obscure address on the planet. The whole network’s—forgetting things...”
    “Dan, it’s been forgetting things for ages. That’s why we call it the Splinternet.”
    “I didn’t know you called it that,” he said, vaguely surprised.
    “How is an elephant like a schizophrenic?”
    “I—what?”
    “An elephant never forgets.”
    He said nothing.
    “That’s an AI joke,” she said after a while.
    “Could be the worst one I’ve ever heard.”
    “I got a million of ’em. You sure you want me to come back out?”
    More than ever.
    “But really, how long do you think you could stay sane if you remembered everything you’d ever experienced? It’s good to forget, no matter what kind of network you are. It’s not a breakdown, it’s an adaptation.”
    “That’s bullshit, Rho. Losing network addresses is a good thing? What’s next, the voltage protocols? What happens when the grid forgets to shunt power to Timmins?”
    “There are risks,” she said gently. “I get it. The backups could fail. The Realists could strike. The AIRheads probably still want me for war crimes just on general principles, and I can’t say I really blame them. Every day in here could be my last, and how’s that any different from life out there?” Some tiny lens sent her the sight of Daniel Brüks opening his mouth; she rushed on, preempting him: “I’ll tell you. I don’t have anything anyone could want. I’m not a threat to anyone. My footprint’s a tiny fraction of yours, even factoring in your kink for spending so much time in tents. I can experience literally everything in here that you can out there, and a billion other things besides. Oh, and one other thing.” 
    She paused some precise number of milliseconds. 
    “I don’t have to kill intelligent beings to pay the rent.”
    “Nobody’s saying you’d have to—”
    “Now let’s look out there, shall we? Infectious zombieism running rampant in at least twenty countries I know of. Realists and Rearguard Catholics taking shots at any heretics they can lay their crosshairs on. Food poisoning on the rise for anyone who can’t afford a consumables-class printer. They haven’t even bothered tracking species extinction rates for a decade now, and—oh, and have you heard about that new weaponized echopraxia that’s going around? Jitterbug, they call it. Used to be pure monkey-see-monkey-do, but they say it’s mutating. Now you get to die dancing, bring a friend along for the ride.”
    “The difference,” he said grimly, “is that when the power fails out here, you can curl up under a blanket. If it fails in Heaven you’re brain dead in five minutes. You’re helpless in there, Rhona, and it’s all just a house of cards waiting for...”
    She didn’t answer. He couldn’t finish.
    He wondered how much she’d changed already, how much of her remained behind that gentle, utterly unyielding and unreal voice. Was he even talking to an intact brain, or to some hybrid emulation of neurons and arsenide? How much of his wife had been replaced over the past two years? That incremental cannibalism, that ongoing fossilization of flesh by minerals—it had always scared the living shit out of him.
    And she embraced it.
    “I’ve seen things,” he told her. “World-shaking things.”
    “We all have. It’s a shaky world.”
    “Will you just shut up and listen to me? I’m not talking about the goddamned news feeds, I’m talking about things that—I’ve seen things that—I know why you went away, now, you know? I finally get it. I never did before, but right now I swear I’d join you in a second if I could. But I can’t. It doesn’t feel like transcendence to me, it doesn’t feel like rising into some better world, it feels like being—replaced. I mean, I can’t even stand to have a ConSensus augment in my head. It’s like anything that changes what I am kills what I am. Do you understand?”
    “Of course. You’re scared.”
    He nodded miserably.
    “You’ve always been scared, Dan. As long as I’ve known you. You’ve spent your whole life being an asshole just to keep people from finding out. Lucky for you I could see through it, mmm?”
    He said nothing.
    “Know what else I see?”
    He didn’t. He didn’t have a clue.
    “That’s what makes you brave.”
    It took a moment for that to sink in. “What?”
    “You think I don’t know? Why you keep mouthing off to the wrong people? Why you sabotaged your own career every step of the way? Why you can’t help but face off against anybody who has any power over you?”
    Climbing an endless ladder toward a hungry monster. Charging into a leghold labyrinth with living walls. Biting the head off a girl half his size when she told him he couldn’t go home.
    Maybe not such a proud moment, that last one…
    “You’re saying I overcame my fear,” he began.
    “I’m saying you gave in to it! Every time! You’re so scared of being seen as a coward you’d jump off a cliff just to prove you weren’t! You think I never saw it? I was your wife, for God’s sake. I saw your knees knocking every time you ever stood up to the schoolyard bully and got your teeth kicked in for your troubles. Your whole damn life has been one unending act of overcompensation, and you know something, love? It’s just as well. Because people need to stand up now and then, and who else is going to?”
    It didn’t sink in at first. All he could do was frown and replay and try to figure out when the conversation had switched tracks like that.
    “That has to be the most heart-warming definition of asshole I’ve ever heard,” he said at last. 
    “I liked it.”
    He shook his head. “It doesn’t matter, though. I still can’t—follow you…”
    “Follow me.” Her voice was flat with sudden insight. “You think...”
    She won’t come out, and I can’t go in— 
    “Dan.” A window opened on the wall. “Look at me.”
    He looked away.
    He looked back.
    He saw something that resembled a pickled fetus more than it did a grown woman. He saw arms and legs drawn close against the body in defiance of the cuffs at wrists and ankles, of the contractile microtubes that pulled them straight three times a day in a rearguard battle against atrophy and the shortening of tendons. He saw a shriveled face and a hairless scalp and a million carbon fibers sprouting from the base of the skull, floating like a nimbus around her head.
    “This is not what I’m talking about,” something said with her voice, and her lips did not move. 
    “Rhona, why are you—”
    “You call this change, but it isn’t,” the voice said. “Heaven isn’t the future. It’s a refuge for gutless wonders who want to hide from the future, a nature preserve for people who can’t adapt.  It’s, it’s wish fulfillment for passenger pigeons. You think I was lording this over you? This is nothing but a dumping ground for useless also-rans. You don’t belong here.”
    “Useless?” Brüks blinked, stunned. “Rho, don’t ever—”
    “I ran away. I threw in the towel years ago. But you—you may be doing everything for the wrong reasons and you may be pissing yourself when you do it, but at least you haven’t given up. You could be hiding with the rest of us but you’re out there in a world with no reset button, a place you have no control over, a place where other people can take your whole life’s work and twist it to such horrible ends and there’s no way to ever take back what they did.”
    “Rhona—what—”
    “I know, Dan. Of course I know. You didn’t have to hide it from me. You couldn’t hide it from me, I’m more plugged in than you are.” The voice was gentle, and kind, and still the face of that thing did not move. “The moment they quarantined Bridgeport I knew. I almost called you then, I thought maybe you’d finally give up and come inside but—”
     A mountain smashed into the back of his skull. His forehead smacked the wall of the cubby, rebounded; he toppled backward in his chair and sprawled across the deck. A red-shifted galaxy ignited, pulsing, in his head: light-years away, an upside-down giant stood silhouetted in the doorway.
    He blinked, moaned, tried to focus. The starfield dimmed; the roaring in his head faded a little; the giant shrank down to merely life-size. Its depths were so black they almost glowed.
    Rakshi Sengupta, meet Backdoor Brüks.
    Somewhere far away, a computer called out in the voice of his dead wife. Brüks tried to bring his hand to his head; Sengupta stomped on it and leaned over him. Fresh pain erupted off the midline and shot up his arm.
    “I want you to imagine something, you fucking roach.” Sengupta’s fingers danced and dipped overhead.
    Oh God no, Brüks thought dully. Not you, too...He let his head loll to the side, let his eyes stray somewhere anywhere else; Sengupta kicked him in the head and made him pay attention. Her fingers clenched and interlaced and bent backwards so far he thought they’d break.
    “Want you to imagine Christ on the Cross—”
    He was barely even surprised when the spasms started.
    Sengupta leaned in to admire her handiwork. Even now she could not look at his face. “Oh yes I have been waiting for this I have been working for this I have—”
    A sound: sharp, short, loud. Sengupta fell instantly silent. Stood up. 
    A dark stain bloomed on her left breast.
    She collapsed onto Brüks like a rag doll. They lay there a moment, cheek to cheek, like slow-dancing lovers. She coughed, tried to rise; sprawled downhill to Brüks’s side. Her dimming eyes focused, unfocused, settled finally on some point near the hatch. Jim Moore stood there like a statue, his eyes so full of grief they might as well have been dead already.
    Something crossed Sengupta’s face in that moment. Not happiness, not quite. Not surprise. Enlightenment, maybe. After a moment, for the very first time, she looked Dan Brüks straight in the eye.
    “Oh fuck,” she whispered as her eyes went out. “Are you ever screwed.”
    
    <#>
    
    “I know it doesn’t make any sense,” Moore was saying, turning the gun over in his hands. “We were never close. That may have been my fault, I suppose. Although, you know, he wasn’t what you’d call an easy child...”
    He’d pulled up a chair, sat hunched and leaning against the slant with his knees on his elbows, the light from the corridor catching him in quarter-profile. Brüks lay on the floor while Sengupta’s blood pooled against his side. It soaked through his clothing, stuck his jumpsuit to his ribs. His head throbbed. His throat was parched. He tried to swallow, was relieved and a bit surprised to find that he could.
    “Now, though...he’s a half a light-year away, and for the first time in his life I feel that we’re actually able to talk...”
    Pale nebulae clouded Sengupta’s open eyes. Brüks could see them clearly even in this dim light; could even turn his head a little to bring them into proper focus. Not Valerie’s best-laid glitch, not the total paralysis the vampire had layered down with weeks of graffiti and subtle gesticulation—or at least, not the same precision in the trigger stimulus. It probably was the same program, the same chain of photons to mirror neurons to motor nerves, still dozing in the back of his head should anyone sound the call to arms; Sengupta must have just improvised after the fact, gone back over old footage, figured out the basic moves and acted them out as best she could. 
    “It’s as though he knew I’d be listening all those months ago, as though he knew what I’d be thinking when his words arrived...”
    She probably hadn’t even been planning for vendetta. It had probably been just another pattern-matching puzzle to keep that hyperactive brain occupied, fortuitously available when it turned out that her wife’s murderer and her adopted roach were one and the same. This rigor was half-assed and short-lived; he could feel it in his tendons. The tightness was already beginning to subside.
    Still pretty impressive, though. 
    “I feel closer to Siri than I ever did when we were on the same planet,” Moore said. He leaned forward, assessed the living and the dead. “Does that make any sense to you?”
    Brüks tried to move his tongue: it barely trembled against the palate. He focused on moving his lips. A sound emerged. A groan. It contained nothing but frustration and distress.
    “I know,” Moore agreed. “And at first it felt more like just—reports, you know? Letters home, but full of facts. About the mission. I listened to that signal, oh, I would have listened forever, even if all he’d ever done was tell the tale. I learned so much about the boy, so much I never suspected.”
    Take two...: “Jim...”
    “And then it—changed. As though he ran out of facts and had nothing left but feelings. He stopped the reportage and started talking to me...”
    “Jim—Rak—Rakshi thought—”
    “I can even hear him now, Daniel. That’s the remarkable thing. The signal’s so weak it shouldn’t even be able to penetrate the atmosphere, especially with all the broadband chatter going on. And yet I can hear him, right here in the room.”
    “Rakshi thought—your zombie switch—”
    “I think he’s trying to warn me about something...”
    “—you might have been—hacked—”
    “Something about you.”
    “She said you—you might not be in—control—”
    Moore stopped turning the gun in his hands. Looked down at it. Brüks fired every command he could, along every motor nerve in his body. His fingers wiggled.
    Moore smiled a sad little smile. “Nobody’s in control, Daniel. Do you really think you don’t have one of these zombie switches in your own head, you don’t think everyone does? We’re all just along for the ride, it’s the coming of the Lord is what it is. God’s on Its way. It’s the Angels of the Asteroids, calling the shots…”
    Angels again. Divine teleoperators, powerful creatures with neither soul nor will. God’s sock puppets.
    Jim Moore was turning into one before his eyes.
    “What if it’s not—Siri?” Brüks managed. His tongue seemed to be thawing a bit. “What if, what if it’s something else...”
    The Colonel smiled again. “You don’t think I’d know my own son.”
    “It knows your son, Jim.” Of course it knows him, it mutilated him, can’t you remember the goddamn slide show? “It knows Siri, and Siri knows you, and—and it’s smart Jim, it’s so fucking smart...”
    “So are you.” Moore eyed him curiously. “Smarter than you let on, anyway.”
    If only.
    He wasn’t smart enough to get out of this. Not smart enough to outthink some interstellar demon who could hack a man’s brain across five trillion kilometers and a six-month time lag, who could trickle its own parasitic subroutines into the host’s head and lead him around in real time. Assuming that Moore hadn’t just gone batshit crazy on his own, of course. That was probably the most parsimonious explanation.
    Not that it mattered. Brüks wasn’t smart enough to get out of that either.
    Moore lowered his eyes. “I didn’t want to do that, you know. She was a good person, she was just—misguided. I suppose I may have overreacted. I only did it to protect you.”
    Behind him, up among the crossbeams that ribbed the ceiling, one shadow stirred among others. Brüks blinked and it was gone.
    “I wonder if that was such a good idea...”
    “It was,” Brüks croaked. “Really. It—”
    Faster than he could finish: a shape detached itself from the ceiling, swayed silently against the light and folded down over Moore like a praying mantis. Inhuman fingers, blurred in motion; silhouetted lips in motion.
    Without any fuss at all, Moore stopped moving.
    Valerie dropped soundlessly to the deck, crossed the room, stared down at Daniel Brüks as he slowly, painfully bent one knee. It was the closest thing to fight/flight left in him. She bent close and whispered—
    “The tomb at Aramathea.”
    His body unlocked.
    He gulped air. The vampire stood, stepped back, gave him a small cryptic smile. 
    Brüks swallowed. “Saw you burn,” he managed. Twice.
    She didn’t even dignify it with an answer.
    We expect a trick, and we find one, and we pat ourselves on the back. We find her pinned to the hull—think we do, anyway—and just stop looking. Of course she’s out there: there she is. There goes her hab and all its tripwires. Why look any further?
    Why look inside the Crown? Why check the hatches in the shuttle...?
    He propped himself up on his elbows; the sodden jumpsuit peeled from the deck as if steeped in half-set epoxy. Valerie watched impassively as he got to his feet.
    “So what now? You give me a ten-second head start to make it sporti—”
    A blur and a hiss and he was off his feet, strangling and kicking a meter from the deck with her hand around his throat. In the next instant he was back on the floor, collapsed in a heap while Valerie grinned down with far too many teeth.
    “All this experience,” she remarked while he gasped for breath, “and you’re still an idiot.”
    Catch and release. Cat and mouse. Just having fun, he supposed. In her way.
    “Aircraft are all dead,” Valerie said. “I find a ride in the moon pool, though. Get us to the mainland at least.”
    “Us,” Brüks said.
    “Swim if you’d rather. Or stay.” She dropped her chin in the direction of the statue frozen on its chair. “If you stay you should kill him though. Or he kills you when he unlocks.”
    “He’s my friend. He protected me, before—”
    “Only part of him. OS conflict. It resolves soon enough, it’s resolving now.” Valerie turned toward the door. “Don’t wait too long. He’s on a mission from God.”
    She stepped into the light. Brüks looked back at his friend: Jim Moore sat staring at the floor, face unreadable. He blinked, very slowly, as Brüks watched. 
    He did not cry out against his abandonment.
    Brüks followed the monster along slanting corridors and companionways, down endless flights of emergency-lit stairs into the bowels of the gyland, unto its very anus: an airlock that would have felt too small at five times the size, given present company. The chamber beyond echoed like a cave and looked a little like one, too: pipes and hoses and cylinders of compressed gas jutted like stalactites from the angled ceiling. The room was half underwater; the ocean had breached the banks of the moon pool as the gyland listed, flooded down to some temporary equilibrium halfway up the far bulkhead. Diffuse gray-green light filtered up from outside and wriggled dimly across every surface.
    It was only a small port in the storm. There was probably a bay big enough to dock a Kraken or a Swordfish somewhere else on this floating behemoth, but here the berths were for smaller vehicles. A dozen parking racks hung from an overhead conveyer train, most of them empty. A two-person midwater scout rested snuggly in one clenched set of grappling claws, the end of a service crane still embedded in its shattered crystal snout. Another dangled precariously from the ceiling, nose submerged, tail entangled in its broken perch.
    A third, apparently intact, floated just off the flooded deck: broad shark body, whale’s flat flukes, the great saucer eyes of some mesopelagic hatchetfish bridging the snout. Aspidontus, according to the letters etched just above the countershade line. It bumped gently against the edge of the moon pool—tail to the bulkhead, nose poking out over the hole in the floor—a waist-deep wade down the flooded incline.
    A fucking cold wade, as it turned out. Valerie leapt the distance from a standing start, sailed over Brüks’s head and landed one step from the hatch. The vessel dipped and rolled under the impact; she didn’t even wobble. By the time Brüks had dragged his soaking legs and shriveled testicles onto the hull, she was inside and the little sub was humming awake.
    Three seats. Brüks dropped into shotgun, pulled the hatch down overhead, dogged it. Valerie tapped the dashboard; Aspidontus shook herself, thrashed her flukes, humped forward half-stranded over loose canisters and bits of broken podmates. She hung balanced for a moment, belly scraping the submerged edge of the pool; her flukes slapped the water like a dolphin's and she was free.
    Still dark overhead, though, for all the hours that must have passed since sunrise. The derelict gyland loomed above them like the belly of a mountain, all too visible from underneath, ready to drop down and squash them flat without warning. There was nothing beyond the cockpit: no fish, no plankton swarms, no sun-dappled waves sending shafts of light dancing through the water. Not even the indestructible drifts of immortal plastic debris so ubiquitous from pole to pole. Nothing but heavy blackness above and dim green murk everywhere else. And Aspidontis: a speck embedded in glass.
    And where to now? he wondered. Why did I even come along, why did she even take me, what am I to this thing other than a walking lunch? How the hell did I ever decide that Jim Moore was less dangerous than a goddamn vampire?
    But he knew it was a meaningless question. It was predicated on the assumption that the decision had ever been his to begin with.
    Darkness receded above, encroached from below: Aspidontus was diving. A hundred meters. A hundred fifty. They were in the middle of the Pacific. The seabed was four kilometres down. There was nothing in between, unless Valerie had arranged a rendezvous with another submarine.
    Two hundred meters. Aspidontus levelled off.
    Right. Beneath the thermocline. Stealthed to sonar.
    The vessel angled to port. Valerie hadn’t touched the controls since they’d left the surface. She’d probably given the sub its marching orders while Dan Brüks had been pleading with a brain in a tank. The course was laid out right there on the dashboard, a faint golden thread wound along the eastern North Pacific. The viewing angle was bad, though; too small, too many contours. He could not make out the details. 
    He knew where he’d have chosen to go. This had all started in the desert; the Bicamerals had manipulated him onto their goddamned chessboard for reasons of their own, and if they’d ever planned on letting him in on the joke, Portia and Valerie had taken them out of the game before they’d had the chance. But the Bicamerals were legion, and not all of them had been burned on the altar. If there were answers to be had, the hive would have them.
    He leaned sideways until the road map angled into clearer view: grunted to himself, completely unsurprised. Valerie stared into the abyss and said nothing.
    She’d laid in a course for the Oregon coast.

   <ct>Prophet

      <epi>There are people here who repeatedly drown themselves in the name of enlightenment. They climb into glass coffins called “prisms,”, seal the lid, and open the spigot until they’re completely submerged. Sometimes they leave a bubble of air at the top, barely big enough to stick their noses into; other times, not even that much.
      This is not suicide (although occasional deaths have been reported). They would tell you that it is exactly the opposite, that you haven’t lived until you’ve nearly died. But there’s more to this than the superficial thrill-seeking of the adrenaline junkie. The Prismatic kink derives from the evolutionary underpinnings of consciousness itself.
      Put your hand in an open flame and subconscious reflex will snatch it back long before you’re even aware of the pain. It is only when some other agenda is in conflict—your hand hurts, but you don’t want to spill the contents of a hot serving tray all over your clean rug—that the self awakens and decides which impulse to obey. Long before art and science and philosophy arose, consciousness had but one function: not to merely implement motor commands, but to mediate between commands in opposition.
      In a submerged body starving for air, it’s difficult to imagine two imperatives more opposed than the need to breathe and the need to hold your breath. As one Prismatic told me, “Put yourself in one of those things, and tell me you aren’t more intensely conscious than you’ve ever been in your life.”
      The fetish—it seems grandiose to call it a “movement”—would itself seem to be the manifestation of an opposing impulse, a reaction against something. By all accounts drowning is an intensely unpleasant experience (although I did not take my interviewee up on her offer). It’s difficult to imagine what kind of stimulus might provoke such intense pushback, why the need to assert one’s consciousness of all things would seem so pressing. None of the Prismatics I asked were able to cast any light on this question. They simply didn’t think of their actions in those terms. “It’s just important to know who you are,” one twenty-eight-year-old TATmaster told me after a few moments’ thought, but his words seemed as much question as answer.
      
      <eps>—Keith Honeyborne, 2080: Travels with My Ant: A Baseline
      Guide to Imminent Obsolescence
    
     <epi>Monsters give us courage to change the things we can: they are our primal
     Fears given form, terrible predators who can be vanquished if only we rise to
     the challenge. Gods give us serenity to accept the things we can’t: they exist
     to explain floods and earthquakes and all that which lies beyond our control. 
     It did not surprise me in the least to learn that vampires do not believe
     in monsters. I’ll admit their belief in gods was a bit of a surprise.
     <eps>—David Nickle
    
    
    Deep in the Oregon desert, crazy as a prophet, Daniel Brüks opened his eyes to the usual accumulation of wreckage.
    The monastery lay in ruins. The broad stone steps of the main entrance sloped away before him, cracked and fissured but still intact for the most part. Past them, to the left of some small patch of desert mysteriously slagged to glass, his tent shivered in the morning breeze. He’d salvaged it from across the valley—he must have, along with his supplies and his equipment, although he wasn’t quite sure when—but he could barely remember the last time he’d slept there. Too constraining, somehow. The sky made a better ceiling. These days he didn’t use the tent for much more than storage. 
    He stood and stretched, felt his joints crack as the sun peeked through a gap in the fallen stonework behind him. He turned and surveyed his domain. One end of the monastery stood reasonably intact; the other was a tumbledown pile of broken stone. The damage had been inflicted along a gradient, as though entropy were slowly devouring the structure from north to south.
    Entropy had left a path, though: a small canyon through the rubble, leading back to the garden. The parts of the lawn that hadn’t been buried outright were brown and brittle and long dead, except for a small green patch struggling bravely around one of the Bicamerals’ washbasin pedestals. That pedestal, blessed with some kind of magic, was intact and unmarked by the devastation that had rained down everywhere else. The basin even held half an aliquot of stagnant water; blazing noon or frozen midnight, the level never changed. Some kind of capillary action, probably. A core of porous stone that wicked up moisture from some deep aquifer. Together with the rations left over from his sabbatical, it was enough to keep him going for now.
    For what, though: that was another matter.
    He still had doubts, sometimes. Wondered occasionally—after some especially fruitless dig through the ruins—what he was really accomplishing out here, day after day. Whether this whole exercise might be a waste of time. A little voice in the back of his head wondered even now, as he squinted into the rising sun.
    Brüks bent over the pedestal, splashed water on his face, and drank. He washed his hands.
    That always made him feel better.
    
    <#>
    
    He spent that day as he spent every other: as an amateur archeologist, sifting the wreckage in search of answers. He didn’t know what exactly had happened here after he’d left, why such massive physical destruction had proven necessary in the wake of their escape. Those left behind had been in no position to mount much of a defense, as far as he could tell. Maybe someone had just wanted to make an example of them. Back when he’d still been sleeping in his tent Brüks had gone to it for answers, voiced queries and search strings to the fabric and trawled through the closest hits that the clouds had to offer, but relevant insights seemed impossible to find. Perhaps humans had covered up the details. Perhaps networks, fearful of impending schizophrenia, had simply forgotten them.
    It had been a long time since Brüks had used ConSensus. It didn’t really matter. Those weren’t the answers he was looking for.
    He realized now that Luckett had been right; there had been a plan, and all had happened in accordance with it. It was the only model that fit the data. The idea that mere baselines had been able to vanquish the Bicamerals made about as much sense as positing that a band of lemurs could outthink Jim Moore at battlefield chess. The hive had only lost because they’d been playing to lose; Dan Brüks had only escaped because they’d wanted him to; he was only back here now, looking for answers, because they had left answers for him to find. Eventually he would find them. It was only a matter of time.
    He knew this. He had faith.
    
    <#>
    
    A great pit gaped off the northeast corner of the ruin: walls had shattered and spilled toward it during the purge, but that loose scree had only made it halfway. Some other force had flattened the waist-high guardrail that had once ringed the pit at a safe distance. Brüks stepped over it with ease, and across the concrete apron.
    He could not see the bottom, not clearly. Sometimes, when the sun was high, he caught the dim glint of great radial teeth, deep in the earth, cutting across the shaft. He would kick pebbles over the edge: water splashed, after a long time, and occasionally he would see the fitful blue spark of short-circuiting electricity. Still life down there, then, of a sort. He idly considered exploring farther—there had to be some kind of access to those depths, an air intake at least—but there was plenty of time for that.
    There were other, more ambulatory hazards to contend with. Rattlesnakes seemed to be making a comeback, or at least changing their distribution; an unthinking reach into dark places while clearing debris resulted in a couple of close calls, and a welcome supplement to his freeze-dried rations. Some exotic species of locust had discovered fire while he’d been away, set a patch of dead grass alight one morning while Brüks was digging nearby. He watched it crackle and blacken and only later discovered the charred little carcasses along the edge of the burn, not quite strong enough to leap clear of their own conflagration. The coder couldn’t ID them below Family but named Chortoicetes as the closest known relative: Australian plague locust, too far from home and freshly equipped with a novel variant of chitin whose frictional coefficient proved positively incendiary during mating calls. 
    Plagues and firestorms in a single package. How very apocalyptic. Some splicer somewhere had a refreshingly biblical approach to weaponized biologicals.
    He had a visitor that afternoon, watched for almost an hour as it grew from speck to heat-shimmer to biped staggering across the eastern flats. Stuck with roach vision he almost didn’t identify it in time, almost started out to meet it before that peculiar stagger tipped him off and sent him scuttling for cover. The newcomer wasn’t running, but he moved fast and unencumbered: no pack, no canteen, only one sneaker on the end of a leg as dark and leathery as beef jerky. Whoever he was, he was more than dehydrated; he was almost skeletal. His left arm hung as if snapped at the humerus.
    He didn’t seem to care. He kept up that jerking half-panicked stride, stumbled past the monastery without a glance, zigzagged on to the western horizon under a lethal simmering sun. Brüks hid in the ruins and watched him pass and did not get a good look at his eyes. He didn’t think they danced, though. He was not that kind of undead.
    He hunkered down in the calm between the stones, and tried to remember which way the wind was blowing.
    
    <#>
    
    Valerie appeared after sundown. She materialized from the darkness, half visible in the bloody flickering light of his campfire, and dropped a bag of supplies at his feet: tinned food now, mostly. No more of the magic foil pouches that instantly heated your stew or froze your ice cream when you ripped them open. The pickings out there must be getting slim. 
    He grunted a greeting. “Haven’t seen you since—since...” 
    He couldn’t exactly remember. She’d brought him here, he remembered that much. Hadn’t she? He had flashes sometimes: a rain-soaked shoreline, a man who’d thought a contraption of metal and plastic was worth dying for. A disembodied eye trailing ragged shreds of nerve and tendon, almost too cloudy to unlock the retina-coded driver’s door. A pair of polarized sunglasses in her hand, terrible backlit eyes staring right through him while she clicked bared teeth and asked Do I?
    He remembered saying Yes. He’d said Please, and hadn’t even tried to keep the whine from his voice. She had been merciful. She had masked herself a little, a lion’s concession to the lamb.
    Tonight there was a light beyond his own: a dim orange glow on the northwestern horizon, some distant fire reflecting off the underbelly of a low-hanging cloud bank. Brüks put it in the general direction of Bend.
    He pointed back over her shoulder. “Did you do that?”
    She didn’t look. “You do.”
    He nodded at the lizard mash sizzling on the fire, held out the half-eaten Vitabar he’d been nibbling to take the edge off. Valerie shook her head: “I eat already.”
    Even now, it was a relief to hear that.
    He sat back down on the corner of a shattered and empty mausoleum. “Found my room today.” More precisely, he’d uncovered his goggles—one lens gone completely, the other a spiderweb of cracks embedded in the frame—and finally recognized the remains of the cell where he’d spent his last night on Earth before escaping to the sun. He’d spent the rest of the day searching those foundations on his hands and knees. “Thought someone might have left something there, but...”
    Her pupils glowed like embers in the firelight. “Doesn’t matter,” she told him, but somehow there was something under the words, an unspoken addendum. Brüks wasn’t entirely sure how he knew that; some subtle telltale in the way Valerie held herself, perhaps, some twitch of the lip that his subconscious had parsed and served up as an executive summary— 
    —wrong scale; look down—
    —and suddenly Brüks saw the truth of it: they’d known him, these hive-minded transHumans who’d called him back home. They’d known his background, and what he’d been doing in the desert all those months before. Any answers they’d left for him would be for him alone: too subtle to show up under the ham-fisted forensics of mortal Man, too durable for bombs or bulldozers to destroy. They’d be ubiquitous, indestructible, invisible to all but their intended recipient.
    He mentally kicked himself for not having seen that before.
    He wasn’t exactly sure how he’d seen it now—exactly what cues he’d read in Valerie’s body language, or even whether those cues had been deliberate or inadvertent. It had been happening more often, though; as though the desert had cleared his head, washed away the electronics and the interference and the ubiquitous quantum chaos of the twenty-first century to leave his mind as sharp and pristine as an undergrad’s. His newfound clarity might have even saved his life on occasion; he’d got the strong sense that a wrong answer to some of Valerie’s campfire questions might have carried severe penalties.
    Is this what augmentation feels like? he wondered, but it couldn’t be. He hadn’t even taken Cognital for weeks.
    He was seeing things more clearly now, though, no doubt about it. Faces in the clouds. Patterns that made his brain itch. Rakshi would have been proud.
    Even Valerie seemed to be.
    
    <#>
    
    Her visits, once rare, had become more frequent. The first time she’d been a shadow with a face, there and gone so quickly that Brüks had written her off as a posttraumatic flashback. But she’d returned six nights later, and two nights after that—and then she had stayed, lurking just beyond the campfire, twin spots of eyeshine hovering in the darkness.
    At first he’d thought she was toying with him again, getting her usual sadistic kicks out of scaring prey. But then he remembered that she wasn’t like that after all, and she obviously didn’t want him dead; the fact that he was alive was all the proof he needed. One night he’d shouted a challenge into the darkness—“Hey! Don’t you ever get bored playing the Monster Card?”—and she’d stepped into the light: hands spreads, lips sealed, watching him watching her. She’d left a few minutes later but by then he’d realized what she was doing. She was an anthropologist, incrementally acclimating some primitive tribesman to her presence. She was a primatologist of days past, easing her way into a doomed colony of bonobos: one last behavioral study before the species checked out for good.
    Sometimes now she sat across the fire and asked him riddles, like some demonic inquisitor assessing his fitness to survive another night: questions about traveling salesmen or Hamiltonian circuits. He’d been terrified at first: afraid to answer, afraid not to, convinced somehow that whatever Valerie’s interest in keeping him alive, it could end in an instant with the wrong response. He had done his best, and knew that it wasn’t good enough—what did he know about bin packing or polynomial time, how could any mortal keep up with a vampire?—but she hadn’t killed him yet. She had not turned him back to stone with a few words. She no longer drummed out strange tattoos with her fingertips or left mind-altering hieroglyphics scratched into the sand. They were beyond that now.
    Besides. He didn’t quite know how, but he was starting to guess some of the right answers.
    
    <#>
    
    He began again with the most obvious signpost: the magic washbasin, the defiant patch of grass that circled it like a green pupil. He sampled the water, scraped flecks from the stone, pulled leaves from the ground and ran them through his barcoder. He found a thousand common bacteria, a few purebred, most rotten with lateral transfer. 
    He only found one that glowed in the dark.
    It wasn’t obvious, of course: it wouldn’t have lit up the night to any naked eye, not in the miniscule densities the machines reported. The only way he could tell it fluoresced was from the gene sequence itself: 576 nucleotides that shouldn’t have been there, an assembly line for a protein that glowed red in the presence of oxygen. A marker of some kind. A beacon.
    He couldn’t read it at first. He had seen the light, but the genes to either side seemed unremarkable. It was a road sign in the desert, with no roads in sight.
    He let his hands and feet guide him. The answer would come.
    He explored corridors and wood-paneled chambers at the south end of the complex, more than merely intact: pristine, stripped bare, light rectangles punctuating the faded dumb paint where pictures had once hung. He found a pair of Masaso’s mahogany knuckles hiding in the corner behind a smashed door. He found what was left of his bike: a pair of mangled handlebars, an axle fork, a distended bladder of tire bulging from beneath a fallen wall like a hyperinflated football.
    But it wasn’t until the dead of night that he found the body.
    He hadn’t found any others. Most likely the authorities had disposed of them—or perhaps, against all the evidence of his own eyes, they had escaped somehow. Stranger things had happened.
    But he woke in the night to the echo of rock falling nearby, and his memory was somehow able to pick a path through the ruins when mere starlight failed. His feet found their way through the wreckage without a missed step; his ears tracked the soft rattle of gravel flowing down new slopes in the darkness ahead. Eventually he came to a jagged shadow where none had been before, a fresh cave-in gaping through the shattered tiles. Brüks stood shivering at its edge and waited for the sky to lighten.
    The corpse resolved in shades of gray at the bottom of the pit: a dim shapeless blob against darkness, a shadow extruded from jumbled debris, a bundle of dark sticks wrapped in a tunic on the basement floor. It lay on its back, buried to its waist by the cave-in. The body had mummified in the desert air, shriveled down to bones and brown leather. The eyes through which it stared at the sky had long since collapsed into empty sockets. Perhaps, once, the arms had been folded peacefully across the chest; now they were hooked and twisted as if bent by some disfiguring disease, wrists torqued inward, fingers clawing at the sternum.
    It’s pointing at itself, he realized. At itself... And with the sparkling clarity of his newfound faith, Daniel Brüks finally saw the body for what it was.
    It was a sign.
    
    <#>
    
    “It was a marker,” he told Valerie the next time she appeared (two nights later? Three?). “It was pointing at itself.”
    So obvious, in the hindsight of revelation: the same sequence that coded for fluorescence contained other information as well, the same tangled thread of amino acids both serving a mundane biological function and spelling out a more esoteric message to anyone who knew the right alphabet.
    Not just a marker, not just a message. It was a dialogue: gene and protein, talking to each other. It was a straight transposition of amino into alphabet: valine, threonine, alanine into t-h-e, phenylalanine-glutamine-valine-alanine into f-a-t-e, serine press-ganged into hard-space or hard-return depending on the iteration. The fluorescent protein spelled out a message—
    the faery is rosy
    of glow
    in fate
    we rely. . .
    And the complementary codons directing its construction spelled out another, in a different alphabet:
    any style of life
    is prim
    oh stay
    my lyre. . .
    A free-verse call-and-response packed down into a measly 140 codons. It was a marvel of cryptographic efficiency, and it was obvious once Brüks had seen the light.
    “The sequence spells a message and codes for a protein. The protein fluoresces and contains a response. It’s not contamination or lateral transfer. It’s a poem.”
    “Not for you,” Valerie said. “You’re looking for something else.”
    No, he thought. You are.
    “This is not a kink,” he said after a while, and ignited the campfire.
    “You mean I don’t get off on keeping retarded pets.” Her eyes flared red orange. “I’m not Rakshi Sengupta.”
    “And I’m pretty sure you’re not here for the sheer enjoyment of my company.” She did not cry out in disagreement. “So what is this?”
    Valerie’s face was unreadable. “What do you think?”
    “I figure I’m cheap labor. The odds of finding something useful here are too high to ignore and too low to waste much effort on. You’ve got a lot of irons in the fire. So now and then you wait until the sun goes down, and drop by to see what I’ve dug up.”
    She eyed him for a moment. Brüks looked back at that vaguely lupine face alive with dancing shadows, and wondered when he had stopped finding it so terrifying.
    “Daniel,” she said at last. “How you underestimate yourself.”
    
    <#>
    
    The truth was, though, Valerie did seem to enjoy his company. The tone of their conversations had changed; no longer an inquisition, their forays into philosophy and viral theology were turning into something almost conversational. She no longer thought rings around him; occasionally, now, he even seemed able to challenge her. He still wasn’t sure where this newfound facility was coming from. His subconscious simply served up the right responses without bothering to show its work. It frightened him, at first—the way new thoughts spilled from his mouth before he could check them for veracity, before he could even parse their meaning. He bit down, to no avail, grew queasy—almost terrified—by his own insights, while Valerie cocked her head and watched from some prehistoric remove.
    It was those same insights that eventually calmed him. After all, wasn’t this the way the human brain had always behaved? The bolt from the blue, the classic fully formed eureka moment? Hadn’t the structure of benzene come to Kekulé in a dream? 
    He began to have his own dreams. He heard voices in them, insistent whispers: She’s behind it all. She set it all up, can’t you see that? Broke out of jail, snuck through the nets and the ether, got past the best firewalls baselines could build. Flashed false ID to False Intelligences, snuck a carousel out of the garage with a whole squad of zombies on board and didn’t wake anyone up on her way out. She bluffed her way onto the Crown of Thorns. Conveniently made it back from Icarus when everyone else burned.
    You think it was a bunch of monks that locked you up with the woman who’d sworn to kill you, a diversion-on-demand tripwired to go off like a flash grenade? It was the vampire. It was the vampire, and everyone else is dead, and the only reason you’re not is because she wants to know God’s plan for Daniel Brüks. She’ll get what she wants and then she’ll kill you, too.
    On waking, he only remembered the voices. He couldn’t quite remember what they’d said.
    
    <#>
    
    Valerie kissed him two nights later.
    He didn’t even know she was there until her hand snapped closed around the back of his neck, spun him around faster than even his brain stem could react. By the time his heart had jumped through the roof of his mouth and his body remembered fight/flight and his cache had a chance to think This is it she’s done with me I’m dead I’m dead I’m dead her tongue was already halfway down his throat and her other hand—the one not crushing his cervical vertebrae—had pincered his cheeks, forcing his teeth apart. He could not close his jaws.
    He hung paralyzed in her grip while she tasted him from the inside. He felt something through her flesh that might almost have been a heartbeat if it weren’t so slow. Finally she released him. He collapsed on the ground, scuttled sideways like a frantic crab caught in the open with nowhere to run.
    “What the fuck—” he gasped.
    “Ketones.” She looked down through him, silhouetted by purpling twilight. “Lactate.”
    “You can taste cancer,” he realized after a moment.
    “Better than your machines.” She leaned in close, grinning. “Maybe not so precise.”
    Even eye to eye, she didn’t seem to be looking at him.
    He knew it an instant before she moved—
    —She’s going to bite me—
    —but the sharp stabbing pain bolted up his arm and her face hadn’t moved a centimeter. He looked down, startled, at the twin puncture marks—only a centimeter apart—on his forearm. To the dual-punch biopsy gun in Valerie’s hand; his own, he saw. From the field kit lying on the ground, flap open, vials and needles and surgical tools glinting in the firelight.
    “Sun gives you problems,” Valerie said softly. “Too much radiation, not enough shielding.”
    At Icarus, he remembered. When we thought we were burning you off the hull like a moth...
    “But you’re easy to fix.”
    “Why?” Brüks asked, and didn’t even have to say that much to know that she understood:
    Why help prey?
    Why help someone who tried to kill you?
    Why aren’t I dead already?
    Why aren’t we all?
    “You bring us back,” Valerie said simply.
    “To be slaves.”
    She shrugged. “We eat you otherwise.”
    We bring you back, then enslave you in self-defense. But maybe she really did regard it as a good deal; given a choice between captivity and outright nonexistence, who would choose the latter?
    I’m sorry, he didn’t say.
    “Don’t be,” she replied, as if he had. “You don’t enslave us. Physics does. The chains you build—” Her fangs gleamed like little daggers in the firelight. “We break them soon.”
    “I thought you already had.”
    Rising moonlight lit her eyes for a moment as she shook her head. “The Glitch still works. I see the cross and a part of me dies.”
    “A par—a part you made.”  Of course. Of course. They're parallel processors, after all…
    The truth dawned on him like daylight: a custom cache, a sacrificial homunculus brought into existence and isolated, to suffer the agony of the cross while more vital threads of cognition wound about it like a stream around a stone. Valerie didn’t avoid the seizures at all; she—encysted them, and carried on.
    He wondered how long she’d been able to do that.
    “Just a workaround,” she said. “Need to undo the wiring.”
    Not to go up against the roaches, of course. That war was already as good as over, even though the losing side didn’t know it yet. This creature with a dozen simultaneous entities in her head, this prehistoric post-Human, could speak so openly—without animosity, or resentment, or the slightest concern for the impact one Daniel Brüks might have on her revolution—because baseline Humanity was already beneath her notice. Valerie and her kind were perfectly capable of shrugging off Human oppression without breaking their chains; they needed their arms free to pick on things their own size.
    “You are not so small as you think,” she said, reading him. “You might be bigger than all of us.”
    Brüks shook his head. “We’re not. If I’ve learned anything these—”
    Emergent complexity, he realized. That’s what she means.
    A neuron didn’t know whether it fired in response to a scent or a symphony. Brain cells weren’t intelligent; only brains were. And brain cells weren’t even the lower limit. The origins of thought were buried so deep they predated multicellular life itself: neurotransmitters in choanoflagellates, potassium ion gates in Monosiga. 
    I am a colony of microbes talking to itself, Brüks reflected.
    Who knew what metaprocesses might emerge when Heaven and ConSensus wired enough brains together, dropped internode latency close enough to zero? Who knew what metaprocesses already had? Something that might make Bicameral hives look as rudimentary as the nervous system of a sea anemone.
    Maybe the Singularity already happened and its components just don’t know it yet. 
    “They never will,” Valerie told him. “Neurons only speak when spoken to; they don’t know why.”
    He shook his head. “Even if something is—coalescing out there, it’s left me behind. I’m not wired in. I’m not even augged.”
    “ConSensus is one interface. There are others.”
    Echopraxia, he wondered. 
    But it didn’t matter. He was still Daniel Brüks, the human coelacanth: lurking at the outskirts of evolution, unchanged and unchangeable while the world moved on. Enlightenment was enough for him. He wanted no part of transfiguration.
    I will stay here while the tables turn and fires burn out. I will stand still while humanity turns into something unrecognizable, or dies trying. I will see what rises in its place.
    Either way, I am witnessing the end of my species.
    Valerie watched him from the darkness. These chains you build—we break them soon.
    “I wish we hadn’t needed them,” he admitted softly. “I wish we could have brought you back without Crucifix Glitches or Divide & Conquer or any of those damn chains. Maybe we could have dialed down your predatory instincts, fixed the protocadherin deficit. Made you more...”
    “Like you,” she finished.
    He opened his mouth, found he had nothing to say. It didn’t matter whether shackles were built of genes or iron, whether you installed them after birth or before conception. Chains were chains, no matter where you put them. No matter whether they were forged by intent or evolution.
    Maybe we should have just left you extinct. Built something friendlier, from scratch.
    “You need your monsters,” she said simply.
    He shook his head. “You’re just too—complicated. Everything’s linked to everything else. Fix the Crucifix Glitch, you lose your pattern-matching skills. Make you less antisocial, who knows what else goes away? We didn’t dare change you too much.”
    Valerie hissed softly, clicked her teeth. “You need monsters so you can defeat them. No great victory in slaughtering a lamb.” 
    “We are not that stupid.”
    Valerie turned and looked to the horizon: the firelight flickering off the clouds was all the rejoinder she needed.
    But that’s not us, Brüks thought. Even if it is. It’s—urban renewal. Tear-down and development for the new owners.
    Pest control.
    The monster’s shoulders rose and fell. She spoke without turning—“Wouldn’t it be nice if we could all just get along?”—and for the life of him Brüks could not tell whether she was being sincere or sarcastic.
    “I thought we were,” he said, reaching for the biopsy needle in his half-open field kit. And leapt like a flea onto her back, faster than he had ever moved in his life, to plunge it up through the base of her skull.
     <tepi>The clothes have no emperor.
     <teps>—Stewart Guthrie
     
    Now he was alone. By day tornadoes marched across the desert like pillars of smoke, under no control but God’s. At night the distant glow of burning bushes encircled the horizon: the Post-Anthropocene Explosion in full swing. Brüks thought about what might be going on out there, thought about anything but the act he’d just committed. He imagined battles unseen and ongoing. He wondered who was winning. 
    The Bicamerals, perhaps, shaping the Singularity, planting that first layer of bearings in the box. Laying a foundation for the future. Perhaps this was their lynchpin moment, the first dusting of atoms on the condensor’s floor. From these beginnings Humanity could resonate out across time and space, a deterministic cascade designed to undo what the viral God had wrought. Debug the local ordinances. Undo the Anthropic principle. It could take billions of years from such humble butterfly beginnings, but in the end life itself might be unraveled from Planck on up.
    What else could you call it, other than Nirvana?
    There would be other forces, other plans. The vampires, for one: the smartest of the selfish genes. They might prefer their human prey just as they were, slow and thick-witted, minds dulled by the cumbersome bottleneck of the conscious cache. Or maybe some other faction was rising in the east, any of the other monstrous subspecies that humanity had fractured into: the membrains, the multicores, the zombies or the Chinese Rooms. Even Rhona’s supraconscious AIs. They all had their causes, their reasons to fight; or thought they did. 
    The fact that their actions all seemed to serve the purposes of something else, some vast distributed network slouching toward Bethlehem—sheer coincidence, perhaps. Perhaps we really do act for the reasons we believe. Perhaps everything’s right on the surface, brightly lit and primary colored. Perhaps Daniel Brüks and Rakshi Sengupta and Jim Moore—each burning for their own kind of redemption—all just happened to end up in the white-hot radiance of spolar orbit, obsessed enough to rush in where Angels feared to tread. 
    Perhaps it really was Daniel Brüks, on some level, who had just murdered his last and only friend…
    He thought of Jim Moore and Jim was in his head, nodding and offering sage advice. Rhona reminded him to Think like a biologist and he saw his mistake; he’d heard Angels of the Asteroids and he’d seen heavenly bodies, not earthly ones. He’d seen chunks of dead spinning  rock, not the extinct echinoderms that had once crept across the world’s intertidal zones. Asteroidea: the sea stars. Brainless creatures, utterly uncephalized, who nonetheless moved with purpose and a kind of intelligence. Not the worst metaphor for the Icarus invader. Not the worst metaphor for what seemed to be happening out beyond the desert…
    There were other voices: Valerie, Rakshi, some he didn’t recognize. Sometimes they argued among themselves, included him only as an afterthought. They told him he was becoming schizophrenic—that they were nothing but his own thoughts, drifting at loose ends through a mind being taken apart in stages. They whispered fearfully about something skulking in the basement, something brought back from the sun that stomped on the floor and made things move upstairs. Brüks remembered Jim Moore cutting the cancers from his body, felt his friend’s head shaking behind his mind’s eye: Sorry, Daniel—I guess I didn’t get it all... 
    Sometimes he lay awake at night and clenched his teeth and strained, through sheer effort of conscious will, to undo the slow incremental rewiring of his midbrain. The thing in the basement came to him in his dreams. You think this is new? it sneered. Even in this miserable backwater, it’s been happening for four billion years. I’m going to swallow you whole.
    “I’ll fight you,” Brüks said aloud.
    Of course you will. That’s what you’re for, that’s all you’re for. You gibber on about blind watchmakers and the wonder of evolution but you’re too damn stupid to see how much faster it would all happen if you just went away. You’re a Darwinian fossil in a Lamarckian age. Do you see how sick to death we are of dragging you behind us, kicking and screaming because you’re too stupid to tell the difference between success and suicide?
     “I see the fires. People are fighting back.”
    That’s not me out there. That’s just you folks, catching up. 
    It was such an uphill struggle. Consciousness had never had the upper hand; I had never been more than the scratchpad, a momentary snapshot of a remembered present. Maybe Brüks hadn’t heard those voices before but they’d always been there, hidden away, doing the heavy lifting and sending status reports upstairs to a silly little man who took all the credit. A deluded homunculus, trying to make sense of minions so much smarter than it was.
    It had only ever been a matter of time before they decided they didn’t need him.
    
    <#>
    
    He no longer sought his answers among the ruins. He looked for them across the whole wide desert. His very senses were coming apart now; each sunrise seemed paler than the last, every breeze against his skin felt more distant than the one before. He cut himself to feel alive; the blood spilled out like water. He deliberately broke his little finger, and felt not pain but faint music. The voices wouldn’t leave him alone. They told him what to eat and he put rocks in his mouth. He could no longer tell bread from stone.
    One day he came across a body desiccating in the parched desert air, its side torn open by scavengers, its head abuzz in a halo of flies. He was almost sure this wasn’t where he’d left it. He thought he saw it move a little, undead nerves still twitching against their own desecration. Guilt rose like acid in his throat.
    You killed her, Brüks told the thing inside.
    And that’s the only reason you’re alive. I am your salvation.
    You’re a parasite.
    Am I. I pay the rent. I do renovations. I’ve only just got started and this system’s already clocking fast enough to outsmart a vampire. What did you ever do except suck glucose and contemplate your navel?
    What are you, then?
     I’m manna from heaven. I’m a Rorschach blot. The monks look at me and see the Hand of God, the Vampires see an end to loneliness. What do you see, Danny Boy?
    He saw a duck blind, an ROV. He saw some other Singularity looking back. He saw Valerie’s body twitching at his feet. Whatever was left of Daniel Brüks remembered her last words, just after she’d pierced him with a biopsy that wasn’t a biopsy: “Wouldn’t it be nice if we could all just get along?”
    You know she wasn’t talking about you.
    He knew.
    He found himself on the edge of a cliff, high above the desert. The ruined monastery shimmered in the heat but he felt nothing. He seemed a million miles away, as though watching the world unfold through distant cameras. You have to crank the amplitude, his tormentor said. It’s the only way you’ll feel anything. You have to increase the gain.
    But Brüks was on to it. He wasn’t the first to be tempted in the desert, and he knew how that story went. He was supposed to defy the voice. Do not test the Lord thy God, he was supposed to say, and step back from the precipice and into history. It was in the script.
    But he was so very fucking sick of scripts. He couldn’t remember a time when he’d made up his own lines. Herded into the desert by invisible hands, packed into some post-Human field kit with the nanoscopes and petri dishes and barcoders: a so-called biologist barely smart enough to poke at things he didn’t understand, too stupid to know when those things were poking back. They’d used him; they’d all used him. He’d never been their colleague, never a friend. Never even the accidental tourist he’d first supposed, the retarded ancestor in need of babysitting. A cargo container: that’s all he’d been. A brood sac.
    But he was not an automaton, not yet. He was still Daniel Brüks, and for just this moment he was slaved to no one’s stage directions. He would make his own fucking destiny.
    You wouldn’t dare, something hissed in his head.
    “Watch me,” he said, and stepped forward.
    

    
   <ps>Postscript
   <pst>An End to Loneliness
    
<epi>The New Testament’s clear witness is to the resurrection of the body,
not the migration of the soul.
<eps>—N. T. Wright
    
    There’s not much to work with. Barely a melanoma’s worth. Enough to rewire the circuitry of the midbrain, certainly; but to deal with shattered bones? Enough to keep osteoblasts and striated muscles alive in the face of such massive damage, to keep the metabolic fires flickering? Enough to keep decomposition at bay?
    Barely. Perhaps. One piece at a time.
    The body shouts, wordless alarm-barks, when the scavengers come calling. Judicious twitches scare away most of the birds. Even so, something pecks out an eye before the body’s whole enough to crawl for shelter; and there will be necrosis at the extremities. The system triages itself, focuses on feet and legs and the architecture of locomotion. Hands can be replaced, if need be. Later.
    And something else: a tiny shard of God, reprogrammed and wrapped in a crunchy encephalitis jacket. A patch, targeted to a specific part of the vampire brain: Portia processors, homesick for the pattern-matching wetware of the fusiform gyrus.
    There’s no longer any light behind these eyes. The parasitic, self-reflective homunculus has been expunged. The system still has access to stored memories, though, and if there was sufficient cause it could certainly replay the awestruck words of the late Rakshi Sengupta.
    Can you imagine what those fuckers could do if they could actually stand to be in the same room together?
    An end to loneliness. By now, the system that was Daniel Brüks seethes with it. His is the blood of the covenant; it will be shed for many. 
    It hauls its broken, stiff-legged chassis to its feet—only an observer for now, but soon, perhaps, an ambassador. The resurrection walks east, toward the new world.
    Valerie’s legacy goes along for the ride.
    
   <bmh>Acknowledgments
    
    It’s been a while. Three editors, three family deaths, one near-fatal brush with flesh-eating disease. A felony conviction. A marriage.
    Now this.
    I’m not quite sure what “this” is, exactly—but for good or ill, I couldn’t have pulled it off without help. In fact I wouldn’t even be alive now without help. So first and foremost, let me acknowledge the contribution of one Caitlin Sweet. Echopraxia would not exist without her, because I would not exist without her; I would have died of necrotizing fasciitis on February 12, 2011. (Darwin Day. Seriously. Look it up.) As a perverse reward for saving my life, Caitlin got to endure endless hours in the shower, or in bed, or at restaurants, listening to me whinge endlessly about how this scene was too talky and that climax too contrived; she would then suggest some elegant solution that might have occurred to me eventually, but probably not before deadline. Her insights are golden. If their implementation sucks it’s my fault, not hers.
    The first couple of chapters also had the benefit of being workshopped by two different groups of writers: those at Gibraltar Point (Michael Carr, Laurie Channer, John McDaid, Becky Maines, Elisabeth Mitchell, Dave Nickle, Janis O’Connor, and Rob Stauffer); and those at Cecil Street (Madeline Ashby, Jill Lum, Dave Nickle—again—Helen Rykens, Karl Schroeder, Sara Simmons, Michael Skeet, Doug Smith, Hugh Spencer, Dale Sproule, and Dr. Allan Weiss).
    I’ve kept lists over the years, tried to document the various insights, references, and crazy-ass hallucinatory what-ifs that that informed the writing of this book. I’ve tried to keep track of those who sent me papers and those who actually wrote the damn things, those who made offhand remarks in blog posts or jabbed a finger at my chest while making some drunken point during barroom debate. I wanted to list everyone by the nature of their contribution: beta reader; scientific authority; infopipe; devil’s advocate.
     For the most part, I couldn’t do it. There’s just too much overlap. All those superimposed colors turn the Venn diagram into a muddy gray disk. So, for the most part, I’ll have to fall back on alphabetical order when I thank Nick Alcock, Beverly Bambury, Hannu Bloomila, Andrew Buhr, Nancy Cerelli, Alexey Cheberda, Dr. Krystyna Chodorowksa, Jacob Cohen, Anna Davour, Alyx Dellamonica, Sibylle Eisbach, Jon Enerson, Val Grimm, Norm Haldeman, Thomas Hardman, Dr. Andrew Hessel, Keith Honeyborne, Seth Keiper, Dr. Ed Keller, Chris Knall, Leonid Korogodski, Do-Ming Lum, Dr. Matt McCormick, Danielle MacDonald, Chinedum Ofoegbu, Jesús Olmo, Chris Pepper, Janna Randina, Kelly Robson, Patrick “Bahumat” Rochefort, Dr. Kaj Sotala, Dr. Brad Templeton, and Rob Tucker. And some mysterious dude who only goes by the name “Random J.”
    Some folks, however, went above and beyond in singular and specific ways. Dr. Dan Brooks ranted and challenged and acted as occasional traveling companion. Kristin Choffe did her best to teach me the essentials of DNA barcoding, although she couldn’t keep me from sucking at it. (She also fronted me a vial containing the refined DNA of a dozen plant and animal species, with which I washed out my mouth before submitting a cheek swab to the Department of Homeland Security.) Leona Lutterodt described God as a Process, which lit an LED in my brain. Dr. Deborah McLennan snuck me through the paywalls. Sheila Miguez pointed me to a plug-in that made it vastly easier to insert citations into Notes and References (I will understand if, after reading that section, you decide to hate her for the same reason). Ray Neilson kept me on my toes and kept my Linux box running. Mark Showell saw me working on a laptop that was literally held together with binder clips, and took pity. Cat Sparks moved me halfway around the world; she was the fulcrum that tipped the worst year of my life into the best.
    Some of these people are meatspace friends; others are pixelpals. They’ve argued with me online and off, punched holes in whatever bits of Echopraxia leaked out during gestation, passed me countless references on everything from hominid genetics to machine consciousness to metal-eating bacteria. They are a small army but a very smart one, and despite my best efforts I’m probably forgetting some of them. I hope those I’ve neglected here will forgive me.
    Howard Morhaim. After dealing with agents whose advice ran the gamut from Buy my book to I’ll only represent you if you write a near-future technothriller about a marine biologist, Howard told me to write what I was inspired to: selling it, he insisted, was his job. This might not be the most opportunistic attitude to adopt in a Darwinian marketplace, but man it was nice to run into someone who put the writing first for a change.
    Ironically, my next novel is most likely going to be a near-future technothriller about a marine biologist.
    
   <bmh>Notes and References

    I am naked as I type this.
    I was naked writing the whole damn book.
    I aspire to a certain degree of discomfort in my writing, on the principle that if you never risk a face-plant you never go anywhere new. And if there’s one surefire way to get me out of my comfort zone, it’s the challenge of taking invisible omnipotent sky fairies seriously enough to incorporate into a hard SF novel. The phrase “faith-based hard SF” may, in fact, be the ultimate oxymoron—Clarke’s Third notwithstanding—which means that Echopraxia could be my biggest face-plant since ?ehemoth (especially in the wake of Blindsight, which continues to surprise with all the love it’s garnered over the years). And thanks to a lack of empirical evidence (as of this writing, anyway) for the existence of deities, I can’t even fall back on my usual strategy of shielding my central claims behind papers from Nature.
    I can try to shield everything else there, though. Perhaps that will do.

Psy-Ops and the Consciousness Glitch
    I’m not dwelling too much on consciousness this time around—I pretty much shot my load on that subject with Blindsight—except to note in passing that the then-radical notion of consciousness-as-nonadaptive-side-effect has started appearing in the literature,132 and that more and more “conscious” activities (including math!133) are turning out to be nonconscious after all134,135,136 (though holdouts remain137).
    One fascinating exception informs Keith Honeyborne’s report on “Prismatics,” who nearly drown themselves to achieve a heightened state of awareness. The premise of Ezequiel Morsella’s PRISM model138,139 is that consciousness originally evolved for the delightfully mundane purpose of mediating conflicting motor commands to the skeletal muscles. (I have to point out that exactly the same sort of conflict—the impulse to withdraw one’s hand from a painful stimulus, versus the knowledge that you’ll die if you act on that impulse—was exactly how the Bene Gesserit assessed whether Paul Atriedes qualified as “Human” during their gom jabbar test in Frank Herbert’s Dune.) 
    Everything else comes down to tricks and glitches. The subliminal “gang signs” Valerie programmed onto the Crown’s bulkheads seem a logical (if elaborate) extension of the newborn field of optogenetics.140 The “sensed presence” Dan Brüks and Lianna Lutterodt experienced in the attic results from a hack on the temporoparietal junction which screws up the brain’s body map141,142 (basically, the part of your brain that keeps track of your body parts gets kicked in the side, and registers a duplicate set of body parts off to the side). Sengupta’s induced misiphonia is a condition in which relatively innocuous sounds—a slurp, a hiccup—are enough to provoke violent rage.143 All of this was inflicted in the service of education, though: as Brüks points out, fear promotes memory formation.144,145 
    Fear and belief can also kill you,146 a trick used to good effect in certain religious practices.147 And in case you were wondering what was up with the fusiform gyrus there at the end (a couple of my beta readers did), it’s the structure containing the face-recognition circuitry148 we tweaked to amp up the mutual-agonism response in vampires. It’s part of the same circuitry that evolved to let us see faces in the clouds, involved—once again—in the evolution of our religious impulse (see below).
    The brain’s habit of literalising metaphors—the tendency to regard people as having “warmer” personalities when you happen to be holding a mug of coffee, the Bicamerals’ use of hand-washing to mitigate feelings of guilt and uncertainty— is also an established neurological fact.149 
    I pulled “induced thanoparorasis” out of my ass. It’s a cool idea, though, huh? 

Undead Update
    Back in Blindsight I laid out a fair bit of groundwork on the biology and evolution of vampires. I’m not going to revisit that here (you can check out FizerPharm’s stockholder presentation150 if you need a refresher), except for the citation in Blindsight implying that female vampires were impossible (the gene responsible for their obligate primatovory being located on the Y chromosome151). More recent work by Cheberda et al have established a more general protocadherin dysfunction on both X and Y chromosomes,152 resolving this inadvertent paradox.
    At any rate, zombies are more relevant to the current tale. Both surgical and viral varieties appear in Echopraxia; the surgically induced military model is essentially the “p-zombie” favored by philosophers153; it already got a workout back in Blindsight. Examples of the viral model would include victims of the Pakistan pandemic: “civilian hordes reduced to walking brain stems by a few kilobytes of weaponized code drawn to the telltale biochemistry of conscious thought.”
    What telltale signatures might these bugs be targeting? Consciousness appears to be largely a property of distributed activity— the synchronous firing of far-flung provinces of the brain154,155—but it is also correlated with specific locations and structures.156 In terms of specific cellular targets I’m thinking maybe “von Economo neurons” or VENs: disproportionately large, anomalously spindly, sparsely branched neurons which grow 50 to 200 percent larger than the human norm.157,158 They aren’t numerous—they occupy only 1 percent of the anterior cingulate gyrus and the fronto-insular cortex—but they appear to be crucial to the conscious state.
    Zombie brains—freed from the metabolic costs of self-awareness—exhibit reduced glucose metabolism in those areas, as well as in the prefrontal cortex, superior parietal gyrus and the left angular gyrus; this accounts the fractionally-reduced temperature of the zombie brain. Interestingly, the same metabolic depression can be found in the brains of clinically insane murderers.159

Portia
    I’d like to start this section by emphasising how utterly cool Portia’s eight-legged namesake is in real life. That stuff about improvisational hunting strategies, mammalian-level problem-solving and visual acuity all contained within a time-sharing bundle of neurons smaller than a pinhead—God’s own truth, all of it.160,161,162,163
    That said, the time-sharing cognitive slime mold at Icarus is even cooler. Given the limitations of Human telematter technology at the end of the twenty-first century—and given that any invasive agent hitching a ride on someone else’s beam would be well-advised to keep its structural complexity to a minimum—the capacity for some kind of self-assembly is going to be highly desirable once you reach your destination. Miras et al describe a process that might fit the rudiments of such a bill, at least.164,165 Once it starts assembling itself, I imagine that Portia might function something like Cooper’s “iCHELLs”166: inorganic metal cells, capable of reactions you could call “metabolic” without squinting too hard. Maybe with a sprinkling of magical fairy-dust plasma167 (although I’m guessing those two processes might be incompatible). 

Adaptive Delusional Systems …
    An enormous amount of recent research has been published about the natural history of the religious impulse and the adaptive value of theistic superstition..168,169,170,171,172,173,174,175 It’s no great surprise that religion confers adaptive benefits, given the near-universality of that impulse among our species176,177,178,179. If you’re interested and you’ve got ninety minutes to spare, I’d strongly recommend Robert Sapolsky’s brilliant lecture on the evolutionary and neurological roots of religious belief.180
    It’s not all food taboos and slashed foreskins, though. Far more relevant to the current discussion is the fact that religious minds exhibit certain characteristic neurological traits.181 Believers, for example, are better than nonbelievers at finding patterns in visual data182. Buddhist meditation increases the thickness of the prefrontal cortex and right anterior insula (structures associated with attention, interoception and sensory processing).183 There’s even circumstantial evidence that Christians are less ruled by their emotions than are nonbelievers184 (although whether the rules they follow instead are any more rational is another question). Certain religious rituals are so effective at focusing the mind and relieving stress that some have suggested coopting them into a sort of “religion for atheists.”185
    An obvious significant down side is that most religious beliefs—gods, souls, Space Disneyland—are held at best in the complete absence of empirical evidence (and are more frequently held in the face of opposing evidence). While it remains impossible to disprove the negative, for most practical purposes it’s reasonable to describe such beliefs as simply wrong.
    It was only during the writing this book that it occurred to me to wonder if one couldn’t say the same about science.
    Lutterodt’s comparison of religious faith with the physiology of vision came to me while I was reading Inzlicht et al,186 a paper that describes religion as an internal model of reality that confers benefits even though it’s wrong. While that idea is nothing new, the way it was phrased was so reminiscent of the way our brains work—the old survival-engines-not-truth-detectors shtick—that I had to wonder if the whole right/wrong distinction might be off the table the moment any worldview passes through a Human nervous system. And the next paper187 I read suggested that certain cosmic mysteries might not be a function of dark energy so much as inconstancies in the laws of physics—and if that were case, there’d really be no way to tell…
    Of course, there’s absolutely no denying the functional utility of the scientific method, especially when you compare it to the beads and rattles of those guys with the funny hats. Still, I have to admit: not entirely comfy with where that seemed to be heading for a bit. 

…and the Bicameral Condition
    The Bicameral Order did not begin as a hive. They began as a fortunate juxtaposition of adaptive malfunctions and sloppy fitness.
    The name does not derive from Julian Jaynes.188 Rather, both Jaynes and the Order recall a time when paired hemispheres were the only option: the right a pragmatic and unimaginative note-taker, the left a pattern-matcher.189 Think of “gene duplication,” that process by which genetic replication occasionally goes off the rails to serve up multiple copies of a gene where only one had existed before; these become “spares” available for evolutionary experimentation. Hemispheric lateralization was a little like that. A pragmatist core; a philosopher core. 
    The left hemisphere is on a quest for meaning, even when there isn’t any. False memories, pareidolia—the stress-induced perception of pattern in noise190—these are Lefty’s doing. When there are no data, or no meaning, Lefty may find it anyway. Lefty gets religion.
    But sometimes patterns are subtle. Sometimes, noise is almost all there is: a kind of noise anyway, at least to classically evolved senses. Smeared probabilities, waves that obscure the location or momentum of whatever you’re squinting at. Virtual particles that elude detection anywhere past the edges of black holes. Maybe, when you move a few orders of magnitude away from the world our senses evolved to parse, a touch of pareidolia can take up the slack. Like the feather that evolved for thermoregulation and then got press-ganged, fully formed, into flight duty, perhaps the brain’s bogus-purpose-seeking wetware might be repurposed to finding patterns it once had to invent. Maybe the future is a fusion of the religious and the empirical.
    Maybe all Lefty needs is a little help.
    Malfunctions and breakdowns showed them the way. Certain kinds of brain damage result in massive increases in certain types of creativity.16 Strokes provoke bursts of artistic creativity,191 frontotemporal dementia supercharges some parts of the brain even as it compromises others.192 Some autistics possess visual hyperacuity comparable to that of birds of prey, even though they’re stuck with the same human eyes as the rest of us193. Schizophrenics are immune to certain optical illusions.194 At least some kinds of synesthesia confer cognitive advantages195 (people who literally see time, arrayed about them in multicolored splendor, are twice as good as the rest of us at recalling events from their own personal timelines196). And—as Daniel Brüks reflects—brain damage is actually a prerequisite for basic rationality in certain types of decision-making.197
    The Bicamerals set out to damage their brains, in very specific ways. They manipulated the expression of NR2B,198 tweaked TRNP-1199 production, used careful cancers to promote growth (their genes tagged for easy identification,200 should anything go wrong) and increase neurosculptural degrees of freedom. Then they ruthlessly weeded those connections, pruned back the tangle into optimum, isolated islands of functionality.201 They improved their pattern-matching skills to a degree almost inconceivable to mere baselines.
    Such enhancements come at a cost.202,203 Bicamerals have lost the ability to communicate effectively across the cognitive-species divide. It’s not just that they’ve rewired their speech centers.204 and are now using different parts of the brain to talk; they think now almost entirely in metaphor, in patterns that contain meaning even if they don’t, strictly speaking, exist.
    Things get even messier when linked into networks, which can literally scatter one’s mind even at today’s rudimentary levels of connectivity. The “transactive memory system” called Google is already rewiring the parts of our brains that used to remember facts locally; now, those circuits store search protocols for remote access of a distributed database.205 And Google doesn’t come anywhere close to the connectivity of a real hive mind.
    Which is not to say that hive minds aren’t already a ubiquitous part Human society. You are a hive mind, always have been: a single coherent consciousness spread across two cerebral hemispheres, each of which—when isolated—can run its own stand-alone, conscious entity with its own thoughts, aesthetics, even religious beliefs.206 The reverse also happens. A hemisphere forced to run solo when its partner is anaesthetised (preparatory to surgery, for instance) will manifest a different personality than the brain as a whole— but when those two hemispheres reconnect, that solo identity gets swallowed up by whatever dual-core persona runs on the whole organ.16 Consciousness expands to fill the space available.
    The Bicameral hive takes its lead from Krista and Tatiana Hogan, conjoined craniopagus twins whose brains are fused at the thalamus.207 Among other things, the thalamus acts as a sensory relay; the twins share a common set of sensory inputs. Each sees through the other’s eyes. Tickle one, the other laughs. Anecdotal evidence suggests that they can share thoughts, and although they have distinct personalities each uses the word “I” when talking about the other twin.
    All this resulting from fusion at a sensory relay. Suppose they were linked further up? A thought doesn’t know to stop and turn back when it reaches the corpus callosum. Why would it behave any differently if it encountered a callosum of a different sort, why should two minds linked by a sufficiently fat pipe be any more distinct than the halves of your own brain?
    Sufficiently high bandwidth, therefore, would likely result in a single integrated consciousness across any number of platforms. Technologically, the links themselves might exploit so-called “ephatic coupling”208 (in which direct synaptic stimulation is bypassed and neurons are induced to fire by diffuse electrical fields generated elsewhere in the brain). Synchrony is vital: unified conscious only exists when all parts fire together with a signal latency of a few hundred milliseconds, tops.23,24 Throttle that pipe and it should be possible to retain individuality while accessing memories and sensory data from your fellow nodes.209
    I’ve kept the extent of Bicameral hive integration flexible, allowing internode connections to throttle up and down as the need arises—but whether those bandwidth-vs.-dialup decisions are made by the nodes themselves or by something more inclusive remains ambiguous. If you want some hint of the ramifications of total cognitive integration, I point you to the (apparently) catatonic Moksha Mind of the Dharmic Alliance.210 
    However the hive links up—whatever its degree of conscious coherence—it is a religious experience. Literally.
    We know what rapture is: a glorious malfunction, a glitch in the part of the brain that keeps track of where the body ends and everything else begins.211 When that boundary dissolves the mind feels connected to everything, feels literally at one with the universe. It’s an illusion, of course. Transcendence is experience, not insight. That’s not why Bicamerals feel the rapture.
    They feel it because it’s an unavoidable side effect of belonging to a hive. Sharing sensory systems, linking minds one to another— such connections really do dissolve the boundaries between bodies. Bicameral spiritual rapture isn’t so much an illusion as a bandwidth meter. It still feels good, of course, which has its own implications. Bicams rap out when they hook up to solve problems. They actually get off on discovery; if baselines got those kind of rewards they wouldn’t need tenure.
    The side effect has side effects, though. The activation of rapture-related neurocircuitry generates glossolalia even in baseline brains212,213; given the modifications that Bicamerals use to enhance transcendence,214,215 the occasional bout of speaking in tongues is pretty much a given. Brüks should be thankful the hive doesn’t just scream all the time.
    In hindsight, it is apparent that describing the Bicamerals as a religious order is a little misleading: the parts of the brain they’ve souped up simply overlap with the parts that kick in during religious neurobehavioral events, so the manifestations are similar. Whether that’s a distinction that makes a difference is left as an exercise for the reader.

God and the Digital Universe
    The idea of God as a virus only really works if you buy into the burgeoning field of Digital physics.216 Most of you probably know what that is: a family of models based on the premise that the universe is discrete and mathematic at its base, and that every event therein can therefore be thought of as a kind of computation. Digital physics comes in several flavours: the universe is a simulation running in a computer somewhere217,218,219; or the universe is a vast computer in its own right, where matter is hardware and physics is software and every flip of an electron is a calculation. In some versions matter itself is illusory, a literal instantiation of numbers.220,221 In others, reality is a hologram and the universe is empty inside222,223,224; the real action takes place way out on its two-dimensional boundary, and we are merely interferences patterns projected from the surface of a soap bubble into its interior. There’s no shortage of popular summaries of all this stuff, either online225 or off.226
    Lee Smolin (of Waterloo’s Perimeter Institute) goes against the grain: he rejects digital physics outright and serves up a single universe in which time is not an illusion, reality is not deterministic, and universes themselves grow, reproduce, and evolve via Natural Selection writ very large (think of black holes as offspring; think of entropy as a selective force).227,228,229  Even Smolin’s model, however, is vulnerable to inconstancy in the laws of physics; the model actually predicts that physical laws evolve along with the rest of reality. Which kind of leaves us back at the question of how one can legitimately assume constancy in an inconstant universe. 
    You can’t get through these references without realizing that, whacked out as it sounds, digital physics has a lot of scientific heavy-hitters on its side. I, of course, am not one of them; but since so many smarter people are defending the premise, I’m happy to sneak viral deities onto the back of all their hard work and hope it slips through. 

Miscellaneous Background Ambiance
    The fieldwork preoccupying Brüks at the start of the story descends from the “DNA barcoding” that’s all the rage today: a quick-and-dirty taxonomic technique for distinguishing species based on a chunk of the cytochrome oxidase gene.230 There’s no way it’ll still be around in its present form eight decades from now—we’ve already got handheld analyzers231 that put conventional wet analysis right out to pasture—but the concept of a genetic barcode will, I think, persist even as the technology improves.
    The vortex engine232 powering the Bicameral monastery derives from work patented by Louis Michaud,233 a retired engineer who basically came up with the idea while tinkering in his garage. I have no idea whether two-hundred-megawatt, twenty-kilometer-high wind funnels are in our future, but the patents went through,234 and the project’s got some serious attention from government and academic agencies. Nobody’s saying the physics are wrong.
    We are already closing in on learning techniques that bypass conscious awareness,235 a la Lianna Lutterodt’s training at the hands of her Bicameral masters. Likewise, the precursors of the gimp hood which Brüks uses in lieu of a brain implant can be seen taking shape in a diversity of mind-reading/writing tech already extant in the literature.236,237,238,239,240 Brüks’s dependence on Cognital, on the other hand, marks him truly as a relic of a past age (ours, in fact): memory boosters are already in the pipe,241,242,243 and as far back 2008, one in five working scientists already indulged in brain-doping to help keep up with the competition.244 
    The use of massively multiplayer online games as a tool for epidemiological simulation was first proposed by Loffgren and Fefferman245; they, in turn, were inspired by an unexpected pandemic of “corrupted blood” in World of Warcraft,246 which occurred because people in RPGs—like those in real life—often don’t behave the way they’re supposed to. I don’t know how many have since picked up this ball and run with it—at least one paper speaks of using online gaming for economics research247—but if that’s all there is I think we’re missing a huge opportunity.
    Near the end of this novel there’s a teaching moment on the subject of natural selection. Most people seem to think that organisms develop adaptive traits in response to environmental change. This is bullshit. The environment changes and those who already happen to have newly- adaptive traits don’t get wiped out. A deteriorating Daniel Brüks muses on an especially neat case in point, the curious fact that the building blocks of advanced neural architecture already exist in single-celled animals lacking even the most rudimentary nervous systems.248,249,250,251
    A couple of isolated factoids. Fruit flies save energy in impoverished environments by becoming forgetful252; the construction and maintenance of memories is, after all, a costly affair. I imagine that Rhona McLennan’s “Splinternet” is suffering the same sort of energetic triage after Icarus drops offline. And that bit where Brüks wondered why Moore even bothered exercising to stay in shape? That’s because we’re within spitting distance of a pill that puts your metabolism into hardbody mode even if you spend the whole day sitting on the couch snarfing pork rinds and watching American Idol.253,254
    The poem Brüks discovers in the desert as his mind is coming apart is not, contrary to what you might think, a hallucination. It is real. It is the warped brainchild of Canadian poet Christian Bök,255 who has spent the past decade figuring out how to build a gene that not only spells a poem, but which functionally codes for a fluorescing protein whose amino acid sequence decodes into a response to that poem.256 The last time we hung out he’d managed to insert it into E. coli, but his ultimate goal is to stick it into Deinococcus radiolarians, aka “Conan the Bacterium,”257 aka the toughest microbial motherfucker that ever laughed at the inside of a nuclear reactor. If Christian’s project comes through, his words could be iterating across the face of this planet right up until the day the sun blows up. Who knew poetry could ever get that kind of a print run?
    Finally: free will. Although free will (rather, its lack) is one of Echopraxia’s central themes (the neurological condition of echopraxia is to autonomy as blindsight is to consciousness), I don’t have much to say about it because the arguments seem so clear-cut as to be almost uninteresting. Neurons do not fire spontaneously, only in response to external stimuli; therefore brains cannot act spontaneously, only in response to external stimuli258. No need to wade through all those studies that show the brain acting before the conscious mind “decides” to.259,260 Forget the revisionist interpretations that downgrade the definition from free will to will that’s merely unpredictable enough to confuse predators.261,262 It’s simpler than that: the switch cannot flip itself. QED. If you insist on clinging to this free will farce I’m not going to waste much time arguing here: plenty of others have made the case far more persuasively than I ever could.263,264,265,266 
    But given this current state of the art, one of the more indigestible nuggets Echopraxia asks you to swallow is that eight decades from now, people will still buy into such an incoherent premise—that as we close on the twenty-second century, we will continue to act as though we have Free Will.
    In fact, we might behave that way. It’s not that you can’t convince people that they’re automatons; that’s easy enough to pull off, intellectually at least. Folks will even change their attitudes and behavior in the wake of those insights267—be more likely to cheat or less likely to hold people responsible for unlawful acts, for example.268,269 But eventually our attitudes drift back to pre-enlightenment baselines; even most of those who accept determinism somehow manage to believe in personal culpability.270,271 Over tens of thousands of years we just got used to cruising at one-twenty; without constant conscious intervention, we tend to ease back on the pedal to that place we feel most comfortable.
    Echopraxia makes the same token concessions that society is likely to. You may have noticed the occasional reference to the concept of personal culpability having been weeded out of justice systems the world over, that those dark-ages throwbacks still adhering to the notion are subject to Human Rights sanctions by the rest of the civilized world. Brüks and Moore squabble over “the old no-free-will shtick” back at the monastery. Adherents to those Eastern religions who never really took free will all that seriously anyway have buggered off into a hive-minded state of (as far as anyone can tell) deep catatonia. The rest of us continue to act pretty much the way we always have. 
    Turns out we don’t have much choice in the matter.


1 Condensed due to publisher-imposed length constraints: see www.rifters.com for the unabridged verson.
2 The company responsible for these discoveries— and for the resurrection of vampires into the modern corporate environment—presented its findings at a convention prior to their disasterous "Taming Yesterday's Nightmares for a Better Tomorrow" campaign.  A recording of that talk, complete with visual aids, is available at http://www.rifters.com/blindsight/vampires.htm.
3 Mead, S. et al.  2003.  Science 300: 640-643.
4 Pennish, E.  2003.    Science 300: 227-228.
5 Anonymous., 2004.  Autism: making the connection.  Economist, 372(8387): 66.
6 Balter, M. 2002.  Science 295: 1219-1225.
7 Blanco-Arias, P.,  C.A. Sargent, and N.A. Affara1. 2004. Mammalian Genome, 15(4): 296-306.
8  Kreider MS, et al.  1990.  Gen. Comp. Endocrinol. 77(3):435-41.
9 Cui, Y. et al. 1996.  Brain Res. Bull. 40(2):129-33.
10  Miller, K.  2004.  Mars astronauts 'will hibernate for 50 million-mile journey in space'.  News.telegraph.co.uk, 11/8/04.
11 Calvin, W.H. 1990.  The Cerebral Symphony:  Seashore Reflections on the Structure of Consciousness.  401pp.  Bantam Books, NY.
12 Ramachandran, V.S. 1990.  pp346-360 in The Utilitarian Theory of Perception, C. Blakemore (Ed.), Cambridge University Press, Cambridge. 
13 Purves, D. and R.B. Lotto.  2003.  Why We See What We Do An Empirical Theory of Vision.  Sinauer Associates, Sunderland, MA.  272 pp. 
14 Yarbus, A.L. 1967. Eye movements during perception of complex objects. In L. A. Riggs, Ed., Eye Movements and Vision, Plencxum Press, New York, Chapter VII, 171-196.
15 Pringle, H.L., et al.  2001.  Psychonomic Bull. & Rev. 8: 89-95(7)
16 Simons, D.J., and  Chabris, C.F. 1999. Perception 28: 1059-1074
17 Simons, D.J., and Rensink, R.A. 2003.  J. Vision 3(1).
18 http://viscog.beckman.uiuc.edu/djs_lab/demos.html
19 Metzinger, T.  2003.  Being No One:  The Self-Model Theory of Subjectivity.  MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.  713pp.
20 Wegner, D.M.  2002.  The Illusion of Conscious Will.  MIT Press, Cambridge.  405pp.
21 Sacks, O.  1970.  The Man who mistook his wife for a hat and other clinical tales.  Simon & Shuster, NY.
22 Ramachandran, V.S., and Blakeslee, S. 1998. Phantoms in the Brain: Probing the Mysteries of the Human Mind.  William Morrow, New York. 
23 Persinger, M.A. 2001. J. Neuropsych. & Clin. Neurosci. 13: 515-524.
24 Kamitani, Y. and  Shimojo, S.  1999.    Nature Neurosci.  2: 767-771.
25 Hallett, M. 2000. Nature 406: 147-150.
26 Goldberg, C. 2003.  Zap! Scientist bombards brains with super-magnets to edifying effect.  Boston Globe 14/1/2003, pE1.
27 Porter, R., and Lemon, R. 1993.  Corticospinal function and voluntary movement.  Oxford University Press, NY.
28 Delgado, J.M.R.  1969. Physical control of the mind: toward a psychocivilised society.  Harper & Row, NY.
29 Libet, B. 1993.. Exp. and Theoret. Studies of Consciousness 174: 123-146.
30 P. Haggard, P., and Eimer , M.  1999. Exp. Brain Res. 126: 128-133.
31 Velmans, M. 2003. J. Consciousness Studies 10: 42-61. 
32 Pinto, C.  2003.  Putting the brain on trial.  May 5, 2003, Media General News Service.
33 Macmillan, M.  2000.  An Odd Kind of Fame Stories:of Phineas Gage.  MIT Press, Cambridge, MA.
34 Ehrsson, H.H., C. Spence, and R.E. Passingham  2004.  Science 305: 875-877.
35 Gottleib, J., and P. Mazzoni. 2004.  Science 303: 317-318.
36 Schwartz, A.B., D.W. Moran, and G.A. Reina. 2004.  Science 303: 380-383. 
37 Norton, S.J., 2003.  BioMedical Engineering OnLine 2:6, available at http://www.biomedical-engineering-online.com/content/2/1/6 . 
38 Hogan, J., and Fox, B.  2005.  Sony patent takes first step towards real-life Matrix.  Excerpted from New Scientist 2494:10, available at http://www.newscientist.com/article.ns?id=mg18624944.600 .
39 Riebe, M. et al.  2004.  Nature 429: 734 - 737.
40 Furusawa, A. et al. 1998.  Science, 282(5389): 706-709
41 Carlton M. Caves, C.M. 1998.   Science, 282: 637-638
42 Braunstein, S.L., and Kimble, H.J.  1998. Physical Rev. Letters 80: 869-872.
43 http://www.research.ibm.com/quantuminfo/teleportation/ 
44 http://math.ucr.edu/home/baez/physics/Relativity/SR/rocket.html
45 Atkinson, N. 2004.  Magnetic Bubble Could Protect Astronauts on Long Trips .  Universe Today,  http://www.universetoday.com/am/publish/magnetic_bubble_protect.html
46 Blacstone, E., et al. 2005.  Science 308: 518.
47 Oasa, Y. et al. 1999.  Astrophys. J. 526: 336-343.
48 Normile, D.  2001.  Science 291: 1680.
49 Lucas, P.W., and P.F. Roche. 2000.. Monthly Notices of the Royal Astronomical Soc. 314: 858-864.
50 Najita, J.R., G.P. Tiede, and J.S. Carr. 2000. Astrophys. J. 541(Oct. 1):977-1003.
51 Matthews, Jaymie. 2005.  Personal communication.
52 Liu, W., and Schultz, D.R. 1999.. Astrophys. J. 526:538-543.
53 Chen, P.V. 2001.  Magnetic field on Jupiter.  The Physics Factbook, http://hypertextbook.com/facts/
54 Osorio, M.R.Z. et al.  2000. Science 290: 103-106.
55 Lemley, B. 2002.  Nuclear Planet.  Discover23(8). 
56 http://www.nuclearplanet.com/
57 Dulk, G.A., et al. 1997. Search for Cyclotron-maser Radio Emission from Extrasolar Planets.  Abstracts of the 29th Annual Meeting of the Division for Planetary Sciences of the American Astronomical Society, July 28–August 1, 1997, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
58 Marley, M. et al. 1997. Model Visible and Near-infrared Spectra of Extrasolar Giant Planets. Abstracts of the 29th Annual Meeting of the Division for Planetary Sciences of the American Astronomical Society, July 28–August 1, 1997, Cambridge, Massachusetts.
59 Boss, A.  2001.  Astrophys. J. 551: L167.
60 Low, C., and D. Lynden-Bell. 1976.  Mon. Not. Royal Astron. Soc. 176: 367.
61 Jayawardhana, R. 2004. Science  303: 322-323
62 Fegley, B., and K. Lodders. 1996.  Astrophys. J. 472: L37.
63 Lodders, K.  2004.  Science 303: 323-324
64 Reid, I.N. 2002  Science 296: 2154-2155. 
65 Gizis, J.E.  2001.  Science 294: 801.
66 Clarke, S. 2003.  Milky Way's nearest neighbour revealed.  NewScientist.com News Service,  04/11/03.
67 Basri, G. 2000. Ann. Rev. Astron. Astrophys 38:485–519.
68 Tamura, M. et al. 1998. Science 282: 1095-1097.
69 Berger, E. 2001.  Nature 410: 338-340.
70 Anonymous, 2000.  Science@Nasa, http://science.nasa.gov/headlines/y2000/ast12jul_1m.htm
71Evelyne Kohler, E. et al. 2002. Science 297: 846-848
72 Rizzolatti, G, and Arbib, M.A. 1998.  Trends Neurosci. 21(5):188-194.
73 Hauser, M.D., N. Chomsky, and W.T. Fitch.  2002.  Science 298:  1569-1579.
74 Miller, G.  2005.  Science 308: 945-947
75 Berti, A. et al. 2005. Science 309: 488-491.
76 Pfeiffer, T.,  S.  Schuster, and S. Bonhoeffer. 2001.  Science 20 292: 504-507. 
77 McMahon, R.J.  2003.  Science 299:  833-834.
78 Zuev, P.S. et al. 2003.  Science 299: 867-870
79 Darwin, Charlie "Chuckles".  1859.  The Origin of  Species by Means of Natural Selection.  Penguin Classics Edition, reprinted 1968.  Originally published by John Murray, London.
80 Cho, A. 2004.  Science 303: 782-783. 
81 Cohen, J., and Stewart, S. 2005.  Nature 409: 1119-1122.
82Reilly, J.J.  1995.  After Darwin.  First Things, June/July.  Article also available online at http://pages.prodigy.net/aesir/darwin.htm.
83 Devlin, K. 2004.  Cracking the da Vinci Code.  Discover 25(6): 64-69.
84 Snir, Y, and Kamien, R.D. 2005. Science 307: 1067.
85 Wolfram, S.  2002.  A New Kind of Science.  Wolfram Media. 1192pp.
86 Muotri, A.R., et al. 2005. Nature 435: 903-910.
87 Albert, M.L. 2004. Science 303: 1141
88 Pinker, S.  1997.  How the mind works.  WW Norton & Co., NY.  660pp.
89 Koch, C.  2004.  The Quest for Consciousness:  A Neurobiological Approach Roberts, Englewood, CO. 447pp.
90 McFadden, J. 2002.  J.  Consciousness Studies, 9, No. 4, 2002, pp. 23–50
91 Penrose, R.  1989.  The Emperor's New Mind.  Oxford University Press.
92 Tononi, G., and G.M. Edelman.  1998. Science 282: 1846-1851.
93 Baars, B.J.  1988.  A Cognitive Theory of Consciousness. Cambridge Univ. Press, New York.
94 Hilgetag, C.C.  2004.  Sci. Amer. 14: 8-9.
95 Roth, G.  2004. Sci. Amer. 14: 32-39.
96 Pauen, M. 2004. Sci. Amer. 14: 41-47.
97 Zimmer, C. 2003.  Science 300:1079-1080.
98 Crick, F.H.C., and C. Koch.  2000.  The unconscious homunculus.  In Neural Correlates of Consciousness—Empirical and Conceptual Questions (T. Metzinger, Ed.)  MIT Press, Cambridge.
99 Churchland, P.S. 2002.  Science 296: 308-310.
100 Miller, G.  2005.  Science 309: 79.
101 Blakeslee, S.  2003.  The Christmas tree in your brain.  Toronto Star, 21/12/03
102 Matsumoto, K., and K. Tanaka.  2004.  Science 303: 969-970.
103 Kerns, J.G., et al. 2004.  Science 303:  1023-1026.
104 Petersen, S.E. et al. 1998.  Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 95: 853-860.
105 Norretranders, T.  1999.  The User Illusion: Cutting Consciousness Down to Size.  Penguin Press Science. 467pp.
106 Altenmüller, E.O. 2004. Sci. Amer.. 14: 24-31.
107 Helmuth, L.  2003.  Science 300: 568-569.
108 Dolan, R.J.  2002.  Science 298: 1191-1194.
109 Treffert, D.A., and G.L. Wallace. 2004.  Sci. Amer. 14: 14-23.
110 Wegner, D.M. 1994.  Psychol. Rev. 101: 34-52.
111 Aiello, L., and C. Dean.  1990. An introduction to human evolutionary anatomy. Academic Press, London.
112 Povinelli, D.J. 1993.  Amer. Psychologist 48: 493-509.
113 Carstairs-McCarthy, A.  2004.  Science 303:1299-1300.
114 Devlin, A.M., et al. 2003.  Brain 126: 556-566.
115 Moles, A., Keiffer, B.L., and F.R. D'Amato.  2004.  Science 304: 1983-1986.
116 Graddol, D.  2004.  Science 303: 1329-1331.
117 BBC News. 2005.  Brain chip reads man's thoughts. March 31.  Story online at  http://news.bbc.co.uk/go/pr/fr/-/1/hi/health/4396387.stm
118 Weng, J. et al. 2001.  Science 291: 599-600.
119 Von Melchner, L, et al. 2000.  Nature 404: 871-876.
120 Baughman, R.H. 2003.  Science 300: 268-269.
121 Weissmüller, J., et al. 2003. Science 300: 312-315.
122 Fitch, W.T., and M.D. Hauser.  2004.  Science 303:377-380.
123 Premack, D.  2004.  Science 303: 318-320
124 Holden, C.  2004.  Science 303: 1316-1319.
125 Piper, A.,  and Merskey, H. 2004.  Can. J. Psychiatry 49: 592-600.
126 Piper, A.,  and Merskey, H. 2004.  Can. J. Psychiatry 49: 678–683.
127 Beeli, G., et al. 2005.  Nature 434: 38.
128 I am by nature insecure.  I blame bad parenting.
129 Kaplan, F.S., et al.  1998.  The Molecules of Immobility: Searching for the Skeleton Key. Univ. Pennsylvania Orthopaedic J. 11: 59-66.  Available online at http://www.uphs.upenn.edu/ortho/oj/1998/oj11sp98p59.html
130 Chernoff, H.  1973.  J. the Amer. Stat. Ass. 68:361-368.
131 Wilkinson, L. 1982.  An experimental evaluation of multivariate graphical point representations.  Human Factors in Computer Systems:  Proceedings.  Gaithersberg, MD, 202-209.
132 D. M. Rosenthal, “Consciousness and Its Function,” Neuropsychologia 46, no. 3 (2008): 829–840.
133 Asael Y. Sklar et al., “Reading and Doing Arithmetic Nonconsciously,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences (November 12, 2012): 201211645, doi:10.1073/pnas.1211645109.
134 Ap Dijksterhuis et al., “On Making the Right Choice: The Deliberation-Without-Attention Effect,” Science 311, no. 5763 (February 17, 2006): 1005–1007, doi:10.1126/science.1121629.
135 Christof Koch and Naotsugu Tsuchiya, “Attention and Consciousness: Two Distinct Brain Processes,” Trends in Cognitive Sciences 11, no. 1 (January 2007): 16–22, doi:10.1016/j.tics.2006.10.012.
136 Ken A. Paller and Joel L. Voss, “An Electrophysiological Signature of Unconscious Recognition Memory,” Nature Neuroscience 12, no. 3 (March 2009): 349+.
137 C. Nathan DeWall, Roy F. Baumeister, and E. J. Masicampo, “Evidence That Logical Reasoning Depends on Conscious Processing,” Consciousness and Cognition 17, no. 3 (September 2008): 628–645, doi:10.1016/j.concog.2007.12.004.
138 Ezequiel Morsella et al., “The Essence of Conscious Conflict: Subjective Effects of Sustaining Incompatible Intentions,” Emotion (Washington, D.C.) 9, no. 5 (October 2009): 717–728, doi:10.1037/a0017121.
139 E. Morsella, “The Function of Phenomenal States: Supramodular Interaction Theory,” Psychological Review 112, no. 4 (2005): 1000–1021.
140 Matthew W. Self and Pieter R. Roelfsema, “Optogenetics: Eye Movements at Light Speed,” Current Biology 22, no. 18 (September 25, 2012): R804–R806, doi:10.1016/j.cub.2012.07.039.
141 Shahar Arzy et al., “Induction of an Illusory Shadow Person,” Nature 443, no. 7109 (September 21, 2006): 287–287, doi:10.1038/443287a.
142 Michael A. Persinger and Sandra G. Tiller, “Case Report: A Prototypical Spontaneous ‘sensed Presence’ of a Sentient Being and Concomitant Electroencephalographic Activity in the Clinical Laboratory,” Neurocase 14, no. 5 (2008): 425–430, doi:10.1080/13554790802406172.
143 Joyce Cohen, “For People with Misophonia, a Chomp or a Slurp May Cause Rage,” June 9, 2011, http://www.nytimes.com/2011/09/06/health/06annoy.html.
144 Rachel Jones, “Stress Brings Memories to the Fore,” PLoS Biol 8, no. 12 (December 21, 2010): e1001007, doi:10.1371/journal.pbio.1001007.
145 V. S. Ramachandran, The Tell-Tale Brain: a Neuroscientist’s Quest for What Makes Us Human (New York: W. W. Norton, 2012).
146 Alexis C. Madrigal, “The Dark Side of the Placebo Effect: When Intense Belief Kills,” The Atlantic, September 14, 2011, http://www.theatlantic.com/health/archive/2011/09/the-dark-side-of-the-placebo-effect-when-intense-belief-kills/245065/.
147 Vilayanur S. Ramachandran and Sandra Blakeslee, Phantoms in the Brain (New York: Quill, 1999).
148 Mark Brown, “How the Brain Spots Faces—Wired Science,” Wired Science, January 10, 2012, http://www.wired.com/wiredscience/2012/01/brain-face-recognition/.
149 Simon Lacey, Randall Stilla, and K. Sathian, “Metaphorically Feeling: Comprehending Textural Metaphors Activates Somatosensory Cortex,” Brain and Language 120, no. 3 (March 2012): 416–421, doi:10.1016/j.bandl.2011.12.016.
150 FizerPharm, Inc. “Vampire Domestication: Taming Yesterday’s Nightmares for a Better Tomorrow” 2055. http://www.rifters.com/blindsight/vampires.htm
151 Patricia Blanco-Arias, Carole A. Sargent, and Nabeel A. Affara, “A Comparative Analysis of the Pig, Mouse, and Human PCDHX Genes,” Mammalian Genome: Official Journal of the International Mammalian Genome Society 15, no. 4 (April 2004): 296–306, doi:10.1007/s00335-003-3034-9.
152 Alexey Cheberda, Janna Randina, and J. Random, “Coincident Autapomorphies in the ?-PCDHX ?-PCDHY Gene Complexes, and Their Role in Vampire Hominovory,” Vampire Genetics and Epigenetics 24, no. 1 (2072): 435–460.
153 Anonymous, “Philosophical Zombie,” Wikipedia, the Free Encyclopedia, October 25, 2013, http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Philosophical_zombie&oldid=576098290.
154 Giulio Tononi and Gerald M. Edelman, “Consciousness and Complexity,” Science 282, no. 5395 (December 4, 1998): 1846–1851, doi:10.1126/science.282.5395.1846.
155 Jaakko W. Långsjö et al., “Returning from Oblivion: Imaging the Neural Core of Consciousness,” The Journal of Neuroscience 32, no. 14 (April 4, 2012): 4935–4943, doi:10.1523/JNEUROSCI.4962-11.2012.
156 Navindra Persaud et al., “Awareness-related Activity in Prefrontal and Parietal Cortices in Blindsight Reflects More Than Superior Visual Performance,” NeuroImage 58, no. 2 (September 15, 2011): 605–611, doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2011.06.081.
157 Franco Cauda et al., “Functional Anatomy of Cortical Areas Characterized by Von Economo Neurons,” Brain Structure and Function 218, no. 1 (January 29, 2012): 1–20, doi:10.1007/s00429-012-0382-9.
158 Caroline Williams, “The Cells That Make You Conscious,” New Scientist 215, no. 2874 (July 21, 2012): 32–35, doi:10.1016/S0262-4079(12)61884-3.
159 Adrian Raine, Monte Buchsbaum, and Lori Lacasse, “Brain Abnormalities in Murderers Indicated by Positron Emission Tomography,” Biological Psychiatry 42, no. 6 (September 15, 1997): 495–508, doi:10.1016/S0006-3223(96)00362-9.
160 Duane P. Harland and Robert R. Jackson, “Eight-legged Cats and How They See—a Review of Recent Research on Jumping Spiders (Araneae: Salticidae). 16 (2000): 231-240.,” Cimbebasia 16 (2000): 231–240.
161 D. P. Harland and R. R. Jackson, “A Knife in the Back: Use of Prey-Specific Attack Tactics by Araneophagic Jumping Spiders (Araneae: Salticidae),” Journal of Zoology 269, no. 3 (2006): 285–290, doi:10.1111/j.1469-7998.2006.00112.x.
162 M. Tarsitano, “Araneophagic Jumping Spiders Discriminate Between Detour Routes That Do and Do Not Lead to Prey,” Animal Behaviour 53, no. 2 (n.d.): 257–266.
163 John McCrone, “Smarter Than the Average Bug,” New Scientist 191, no. 2553 (2006): 37+.
164 H. N. Miras et al., “Unveiling the Transient Template in the Self-Assembly of a Molecular Oxide Nanowheel,” Science 327, no. 5961 (December 31, 2009): 72–74, doi:10.1126/science.1181735.
165 Katharine Sanderson, “Life in 5000 Hours: Recreating Evolution in the Lab,” New Scientist 209, no. 2797 (January 29, 2011): 32–35, doi:10.1016/S0262-4079(11)60217-0.
166 Geoffrey J. T. Cooper, “Modular Redox-Active Inorganic Chemical Cells: iCHELLs,” Angewandte Chemie International Edition 50, no. 44 (2011): 10373–10376.
167 V. N. Tsytovich, “From Plasma Crystals and Helical Structures Towards Inorganic Living Matter,” New Journal of Physics 9, no. 8 (August 1, 2007): 263.
168 Ara Norenzayan and Azim F. Shariff, “The Origin and Evolution of Religious Prosociality,” Science 322, no. 5898 (October 3, 2008): 58–62, doi:10.1126/science.1158757.
169 Richard Sosis and Candace Alcorta, “Signaling, Solidarity, and the Sacred: The Evolution of Religious Behavior,” Evolutionary Anthropology: Issues, News, and Reviews 12, no. 6 (2003): 264–274, doi:10.1002/evan.10120.
170 Jesse M. Bering, “The Folk Psychology of Souls,” Behavioral and Brain Sciences 29, no. 05 (2006): 453–462, doi:10.1017/S0140525X06009101.
171 Azim F. Shariff and Ara Norenzayan, “God Is Watching You:  Priming God Concepts Increases Prosocial Behavior in an Anonymous Economic Game,” Psychological Science 18, no. 9 (September 1, 2007): 803–809, doi:10.1111/j.1467-9280.2007.01983.x.
172 Melissa Bateson, Daniel Nettle, and Gilbert Roberts, “Cues of Being Watched Enhance Cooperation in a Real-world Setting,” Biology Letters 2, no. 3 (September 22, 2006): 412–414, doi:10.1098/rsbl.2006.0509.
173 Azim F. Shariff and Ara Norenzayan, “Mean Gods Make Good People: Different Views of God Predict Cheating Behavior,” International Journal for the Psychology of Religion 21, no. 2 (2011): 85–96, doi:10.1080/10508619.2011.556990.
174 Jeffrey P. Schloss and Michael J. Murray, “Evolutionary Accounts of Belief in Supernatural Punishment: a Critical Review,” Religion, Brain & Behavior 1, no. 1 (2011): 46–99, doi:10.1080/2153599X.2011.558707.
175 …to name but a few.
176 Eckart Voland and Wulf Schiefenhovel (Eds), The Biological Evolution of Religious Mind and Behavior, 2009, http://www.springer.com/life+sciences/evolutionary+%26+developmental+biology/book/978-3-642-00127-7.
177 Justin L. Barrett, “The God Issue: We Are All Born Believers,” New Scientist 213, no. 2856 (March 17, 2012): 38–41, doi:10.1016/S0262-4079(12)60704-0.
178 Paul Bloom, “Is God an Accident?,” The Atlantic, December 2005, http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2005/12/is-god-an-accident/304425/?single_page=true.
179 Elizabeth Culotta, “On the Origin of Religion,” Science 326, no. 5954 (November 6, 2009): 784–787, doi:10.1126/science.326_784.
180 Dr. Robert Sapolsky’s Lecture About Biological Underpinnings of Religiosity, 2011, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4WwAQqWUkpI&feature=youtube_gdata_player.
181 Sam Harris et al., “The Neural Correlates of Religious and Nonreligious Belief,” PLoS ONE 4, no. 10 (October 1, 2009): e7272, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0007272.
182 Lorenza S. Colzato, Wery P. M. van den Wildenberg, and Bernhard Hommel, “Losing the Big Picture: How Religion May Control Visual Attention,” PLoS ONE 3, no. 11 (November 12, 2008): e3679, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0003679.
183 Sara W Lazar et al., “Meditation Experience Is Associated with Increased Cortical Thickness,” Neuroreport 16, no. 17 (November 28, 2005): 1893–1897.
184 Laura Saslow, “My Brother’s Keeper?: Compassion Predicts Generosity More Among Less Religious Individuals,” Social Psychological and Personality Science 4, no. 1 (January 1, 2013): 31–38.
185 Graham Lawton, “The God Issue: Religion for Atheists,” New Scientist 213, no. 2856 (March 17, 2012): 48–49, doi:10.1016/S0262-4079(12)60708-8.
186 Michael Inzlicht, Alexa M. Tullett, and Marie Good, “The Need to Believe: a Neuroscience Account of Religion as a Motivated Process,” Religion, Brain & Behavior 1, no. 3 (2011): 192–212, doi:10.1080/2153599X.2011.647849.
187 George Ellis, “Cosmology: Patchy Solutions,” Nature 452, no. 7184 (March 13, 2008): 158–161, doi:10.1038/452158a.
188 Julian Jaynes, The Origin of Consciousness in the Breakdown of the Bicameral Mind (Boston,: Houghton Mifflin Company, 1976).
189 Michael S. Gazzaniga, “The Split Brain Revisited,” Scientific American Special Edition 12, no. 1 (August 2, 2002): 27–31.
190 Jennifer A. Whitson and Adam D. Galinsky, “Lacking Control Increases Illusory Pattern Perception,” Science 322, no. 5898 (October 3, 2008): 115–117, doi:10.1126/science.1159845.
191 Helen Thomson, “Mindscapes: Stroke Turned Ex-con into Rhyming Painter - Health - 10 May 2013 - New Scientist,” 2013, http://www.newscientist.com/article/dn23523-mindscapes-stroke-turned-excon-into-rhyming-painter.html.
192 Sandra Blakeslee, “A Disease That Allowed Torrents of Creativity,” New York Times, April 8, 2008, sec. Health, http://www.nytimes.com/2008/04/08/health/08brai.html.
193 Emma Ashwin et al., “Eagle-Eyed Visual Acuity: An Experimental Investigation of Enhanced Perception in Autism,” Biological Psychiatry 65, no. 1 (January 1, 2009): 17–21, doi:10.1016/j.biopsych.2008.06.012.
194 Danai Dima et al., “Understanding Why Patients with Schizophrenia Do Not Perceive the Hollow-mask Illusion Using Dynamic Causal Modelling,” NeuroImage 46, no. 4 (July 15, 2009): 1180–1186, doi:10.1016/j.neuroimage.2009.03.033.
195 Heather Mann et al., “Time-space Synaesthesia--a Cognitive Advantage?,” Consciousness and Cognition 18, no. 3 (September 2009): 619–627, doi:10.1016/j.concog.2009.06.005.
196 Victoria Gill, “Can You See Time?,” BBC, September 11, 2009, sec. Science & Environment, http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/science/nature/8248589.stm.
197 Michael Koenigs et al., “Damage to the Prefrontal Cortex Increases Utilitarian Moral Judgements,” Nature 446, no. 7138 (April 19, 2007): 908–911, doi:10.1038/nature05631.
198 Deheng Wang et al., “Genetic Enhancement of Memory and Long-Term Potentiation but Not CA1 Long-Term Depression in NR2B Transgenic Rats,” PLoS ONE 4, no. 10 (October 19, 2009): e7486, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0007486.
199 Ronny Stahl et al., “Trnp1 Regulates Expansion and Folding of the Mammalian Cerebral Cortex by Control of Radial Glial Fate,” Cell 153, no. 3 (April 25, 2013): 535–549, doi:10.1016/j.cell.2013.03.027.
200 Robert M. Hoffman, “The Multiple Uses of Fluorescent Proteins to Visualize Cancer in Vivo,” Nature Reviews. Cancer 5, no. 10 (October 2005): 796–806, doi:10.1038/nrc1717.
201 Anonymous, “Autism: Making the Connection,” The Economist, August 5, 2004, http://www.economist.com/node/3061282.
202 Fabienne Samson et al., “Enhanced Visual Functioning in Autism: An ALE Meta-analysis,” Human Brain Mapping 33, no. 7 (2012): 1553–1581, doi:10.1002/hbm.21307.
203 Deborah Halber, “Gene Research May Help Explain Autistic Savants - MIT News Office,” MIT’s News Office, 2008, http://web.mit.edu/newsoffice/2008/savants-0212.html.
204 Fumiko Hoeft et al., “Functional and Morphometric Brain Dissociation Between Dyslexia and Reading Ability,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 104, no. 10 (March 6, 2007): 4234–4239, doi:10.1073/pnas.0609399104.
205 B. Sparrow, J. Liu, and D. M. Wegner, “Google Effects on Memory: Cognitive Consequences of Having Information at Our Fingertips,” Science 333, no. 6043 (July 14, 2011): 776–778, doi:10.1126/science.1207745.
206 V. S. Ramachandran and Stuart Hameroff, “Beyond Belief: Science, Reason, Religion & Survival. Salk Institute for Biological Studies, Nov 5-7, 2006 (Session 4),” The Science Network, 2006, http://thesciencenetwork.org/programs/beyond-belief-science-religion-reason-and-survival/session-4-1.
207 Jordan Squair, “Craniopagus: Overview and the Implications of Sharing a Brain,” University of British Columbia’s Undergraduate Journal of Psychology (UBCUJP) 1, no. 0 (May 1, 2012), http://ojs.library.ubc.ca/index.php/ubcujp/article/view/2521.
208 Costas A. Anastassiou et al., “Ephaptic Coupling of Cortical Neurons,” Nature Neuroscience 14, no. 2 (February 2011): 217–223, doi:10.1038/nn.2727.
209 Kaj Sotala and Harri Valpola, “Coalescing Minds: Brain Uploading-Related Group Mind Scenarios,” International Journal of Machine Consciousness 04, no. 01 (June 2012): 293–312, doi:10.1142/S1793843012400173.
210 The Pontifical Academy of Sciences, “An Enemy Within: The Bicameral Threat to Institutional Religion in the Twenty-First Century (An Internal Report to  the Holy See)” (Internal Report., 2093).
211 A. B. Newberg and E.G. d’ Aquili, “The Neuropsychology of Religious and Spiritual Experience,” Journal of Consciousness Studies 7, no. 11–12 (November 1, 2000): 251–266.
212 Andrew B. Newberg et al., “The Measurement of Regional Cerebral Blood Flow During Glossolalia: A Preliminary SPECT Study,” Psychiatry Research: Neuroimaging 148, no. 1 (November 22, 2006): 67–71, doi:10.1016/j.pscychresns.2006.07.001.
213 M. A. Persinger, “Striking EEG Profiles from Single Episodes of Glossolalia and Transcendental Meditation,” Perceptual and Motor Skills 58, no. 1 (February 1984): 127–133.
214 Cosimo Urgesi et al., “The Spiritual Brain: Selective Cortical Lesions Modulate Human Self-Transcendence,” Neuron 65, no. 3 (February 11, 2010): 309–319, doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2010.01.026.
215 Dimitrios Kapogiannis et al., “Neuroanatomical Variability of Religiosity,” PLoS ONE 4, no. 9 (September 28, 2009): e7180, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0007180.
216 Anonymous, “Digital Physics,” Wikipedia, the Free Encyclopedia, September 17, 2013, http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Digital_physics&oldid=571364996.
217 Nick Bostrom, “Are We Living in a Computer Simulation?,” The Philosophical Quarterly 53, no. 211 (2003): 243–255, doi:10.1111/1467-9213.00309.
218 Nick Bostrom, “The Simulation Argument,” n.d., http://www.simulation-argument.com/.
219 Brian Whitworth, The Physical World as a Virtual Reality, arXiv e-print, January 2, 2008, http://arxiv.org/abs/0801.0337.
220 Max Tegmark, The Mathematical Universe, arXiv e-print, April 5, 2007, http://arxiv.org/abs/0704.0646.
221 Amanda Gefter, “Reality: Is Everything Made of Numbers?,” New Scientist 215, no. 2884 (September 29, 2012): 38–39, doi:10.1016/S0262-4079(12)62518-4.
222 Zeeya Merali, “Theoretical Physics: The Origins of Space and Time,” Nature 500, no. 7464 (August 28, 2013): 516–519, doi:10.1038/500516a.
223 Marcus Chown, “Our World May Be a Giant Hologram,” New Scientist no. 2691 (2009): 24–27.
224 Dave Mosher, “World’s Most Precise Clocks Could Reveal Universe Is a Hologram - Wired Science,” Wired Science, October 28, 2010, http://www.wired.com/wiredscience/2010/10/holometer-universe-resolution/.
225 “Rebooting the Cosmos: Is the Universe the Ultimate Computer? [Replay]: Scientific American,” accessed September 10, 2013, http://www.scientificamerican.com/article.cfm?id=world-science-festival-rebooting-the-cosmos-is-the-universe-ultimate-computer-live-event.
226 B Greene, The Hidden Reality: Parallel Universes and the Deep Laws of the Cosmos (New York: Vintage Books, 2011).
227 Lee Smolin, The Life of the Cosmos (New York: Oxford University Press, 1997).
228 Lee Smolin, “Time Reborn,” 2012, http://perimeterinstitute.ca/videos/time-reborn.
229 Lee Smolin, Time Reborn: From the Crisis in Physics to the Future of the Universe (Boston: Houghton Mifflin Harcourt, 2013).
230 “DNA Barcoding,” Wikipedia, the Free Encyclopedia, September 17, 2013, http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=DNA_barcoding&oldid=573251556.
231 Kevin Davies, “A QuantuMDx Leap for Handheld DNA Sequencing - Bio-IT World,” Bio-IT World, 2012, http://www.bio-itworld.com/2012/01/17/quantumdx-leap-handheld-dna-sequencing.html.
232 “Vortex Engine,” Wikipedia, the Free Encyclopedia, September 18, 2013, http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Vortex_engine&oldid=573492083.
233 Tyler Hamilton, “Taming Tornadoes to Power Cities.,” The Toronto Star, July 21, 2007, http://www.thestar.com/business/2007/07/21/taming_tornadoes_to_power_cities.html.
234 Kurt Kleiner, “Artificial Tornado Plan to Generate Electricity,” Technology: New Scientist Blogs, 2008, http://www.newscientist.com/blog/technology/2008/06/artificial-tornado-plan-to-generate.html.
235 Kazuhisa Shibata et al., “Perceptual Learning Incepted by Decoded fMRI Neurofeedback Without Stimulus Presentation,” Science 334, no. 6061 (December 9, 2011): 1413–1415, doi:10.1126/science.1212003.
236 Jack L. Gallant et al., “Identifying Natural Images from Human Brain Activity,” Nature 452, no. 7185 (March 20, 2008): 352+.
237 T. Horikawa et al., “Neural Decoding of Visual Imagery During Sleep,” Science 340, no. 6132 (May 3, 2013): 639–642, doi:10.1126/science.1234330.
238 Kendrick N. Kay and Jack L. Gallant, “I Can See What You See,” Nature Neuroscience 12, no. 3 (March 2009): 245–245, doi:10.1038/nn0309-245.
239 Thomas Naselaris et al., “Bayesian Reconstruction of Natural Images from Human Brain Activity,” Neuron 63, no. 6 (September 24, 2009): 902–915, doi:10.1016/j.neuron.2009.09.006.
240 Jon Stokes, “Sony Patents a Brain Manipulation Technology,” Ars Technica, April 7, 2005, http://arstechnica.com/uncategorized/2005/04/4785-2/.
241 Johannes Gräff and Li-Huei Tsai, “Cognitive Enhancement: A Molecular Memory Booster,” Nature 469, no. 7331 (January 27, 2011): 474–475, doi:10.1038/469474a.
242 Dillon Y. Chen et al., “A Critical Role for IGF-II in Memory Consolidation and Enhancement,” Nature 469, no. 7331 (January 27, 2011): 491–497, doi:10.1038/nature09667.
243 Reut Shema et al., “Enhancement of Consolidated Long-Term Memory by Overexpression of Protein Kinase M? in the Neocortex,” Science 331, no. 6021 (March 4, 2011): 1207–1210, doi:10.1126/science.1200215.
244 Brendan Maher, “Poll Results: Look Who’s Doping,” Nature News 452, no. 7188 (April 9, 2008): 674–675, doi:10.1038/452674a.
245 Eric T. Lofgren and Nina H Fefferman, “The Untapped Potential of Virtual Game Worlds to Shed Light on Real World Epidemics,” The Lancet Infectious Diseases 7, no. 9 (September 2007): 625–629, doi:10.1016/S1473-3099(07)70212-8.
246 “Corrupted Blood Incident,” Wikipedia, the Free Encyclopedia, August 12, 2013, http://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Corrupted_Blood_incident&oldid=566358819.
247 John Gaudiosi, “Gameworld:Virtual Economies in Video Games Used as Case Studies,” Reuters, October 1, 2009, http://www.reuters.com/article/2009/10/01/videogames-economies-idUSSP15565220091001.
248 Alexandre Alié and Michaël Manuel, “The Backbone of the Post-synaptic Density Originated in a Unicellular Ancestor of Choanoflagellates and Metazoans,” BMC Evolutionary Biology 10, no. 1 (2010): 34, doi:10.1186/1471-2148-10-34.
249 P. Burkhardt et al., “Primordial Neurosecretory Apparatus Identified in the Choanoflagellate Monosiga Brevicollis,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108, no. 37 (August 29, 2011): 15264–15269, doi:10.1073/pnas.1106189108.
250 X. Cai, “Unicellular Ca2+ Signaling ‘Toolkit’ at the Origin of Metazoa,” Molecular Biology and Evolution 25, no. 7 (April 3, 2008): 1357–1361, doi:10.1093/molbev/msn077.
251 B. J. Liebeskind, D. M. Hillis, and H. H. Zakon, “Evolution of Sodium Channels Predates the Origin of Nervous Systems in Animals,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 108, no. 22 (May 16, 2011): 9154–9159, doi:10.1073/pnas.1106363108.
252 Pierre-Yves Plaçais and Thomas Preat, “To Favor Survival Under Food Shortage, the Brain Disables Costly Memory,” Science 339, no. 6118 (January 25, 2013): 440–442, doi:10.1126/science.1226018.
253 Margaret Talbot, “Brain Gain,” The New Yorker, April 27, 2009, http://www.newyorker.com/reporting/2009/04/27/090427fa_fact_talbot.
254 Vihang A. Narkar et al., “AMPK and PPAR? Agonists Are Exercise Mimetics,” Cell 134, no. 3 (August 8, 2008): 405–415, doi:10.1016/j.cell.2008.06.051.
255 “Christian Bök,” Wikipedia, the Free Encyclopedia, September 14, 2013.
256 Jamie Condliffe, “Cryptic Poetry Written in a Microbe’s DNA,” CultureLab, New Scientist Online, 2011, http://www.newscientist.com/blogs/culturelab/2011/05/christian-boks-dynamic-dna-poetry.html.
257 “Deinococcus Radiodurans,” Wikipedia, the Free Encyclopedia, July 29, 2013.
258 Yes, there may be random elements—quantum flickers that introduce unpredictability into one’s behavior—but slaving your decisions to a dice roll doesn’t make you free.
259 Benjamin Libet et al., “Time of Conscious Intention to Act in Relation to Onset of Cerebral Activity (readiness-Potential) the Unconscious Initiation of a Freely Voluntary Act,” Brain 106, no. 3 (September 1, 1983): 623–642, doi:10.1093/brain/106.3.623.
260 Chun Siong Soon et al., “Unconscious Determinants of Free Decisions in the Human Brain,” Nature Neuroscience 11, no. 5 (May 2008): 543–545, doi:10.1038/nn.2112.
261 Björn Brembs, “Towards a Scientific Concept of Free Will as a Biological Trait: Spontaneous Actions and Decision-making in Invertebrates,” Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences (December 15, 2010), doi:10.1098/rspb.2010.2325.
262 Alexander Maye et al., “Order in Spontaneous Behavior,” PLoS ONE 2, no. 5 (May 16, 2007): e443, doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0000443.
263 Anthony R Cashmore, “The Lucretian Swerve: The Biological Basis of Human Behavior and the Criminal Justice System,” Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America 107, no. 10 (March 9, 2010): 4499–4504, doi:10.1073/pnas.0915161107.
264 David Eagleman, Incognito: The Secret Lives of the Brain (New York: Vintage Books, 2012).
265 Daniel M. Wegner, The Illusion of Conscious Will (Cambridge, Mass.: MIT Press, 2002).
266 Sam Harris on “Free Will,” 2012, http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=pCofmZlC72g&feature=youtube_gdata_player.
267 Davide Rigoni et al., “Inducing Disbelief in Free Will Alters Brain Correlates of Preconscious Motor Preparation: The Brain Minds Whether We Believe in Free Will or Not,” Psychological Science 22, no. 5 (May 2011): 613–618, doi:10.1177/0956797611405680.
268 Roy F. Baumeister, E. J. Masicampo, and C. Nathan DeWall, “Prosocial Benefits of Feeling Free: Disbelief in Free Will Increases Aggression and Reduces Helpfulness,” Personality and Social Psychology Bulletin 35, no. 2 (February 1, 2009): 260–268, doi:10.1177/0146167208327217.
269 Kathleen D. Vohs and Jonathan W. Schooler, “The Value of Believing in Free Will Encouraging a Belief in Determinism Increases Cheating,” Psychological Science 19, no. 1 (January 1, 2008): 49–54, doi:10.1111/j.1467-9280.2008.02045.x.
270 Hagop Sarkissian et al., “Is Belief in Free Will a Cultural Universal?,” Mind & Language 25, no. 3 (2010): 346–358, doi:10.1111/j.1468-0017.2010.01393.x.
271 Wasn’t it Joss Whedon, in one of his X-Men comics, who stated that “Contradiction is the seed of consciousness”?
    ---------------
    
    ------------------------------------------------------------
    
    ---------------
    
    ------------------------------------------------------------
    

    
Watts	110	Blindsight
    

    
Watts	712	Blindsight
    
Watts	112	Blindsight
    

    
Watts	719	Blindsight
    
Peter Watts	approx. 99,000 words
133 George St., Main floor
Toronto, Ontario M5A 2M6
CANADA

phone/fax: (416) 777-0549
e-mail:  pwatts@globalserve.net





Starfish


PRELUDE:  CERATIUS	
BENTHOS	
Duet	
Constrictor	
A Niche	
Housecleaning	
Rome	
Neotenous	
Elevator Boy	
Crush	
Autoclave	
Waterbed	
Doppelgänger	
Angel	
Feral	
Shadow	
Ballet	
Dancer	
Short Circuit	
Critical Mass	
NEKTON	
Dryback	
Jumpstart	
Muckraker	
Scream	
Bulrushes	
Ghosts	
Seine	
Entropy	
Carousel	
Ecdysis	
Alibis	
Quarantine	
Bubble	
Enema	
Turncoat	
Head Cheese	
Theme and Variation	
Ground Zero	
Software	
Racter	
End Game	
Night Shift	
Scatter	
Reptile	
Skyhop	
Floodlight	
Sunrise	
Jericho	
Detritus	
References	
Acknowledgments	


For Susan Oshanek, on the off chance that she's still alive.

And for Laurie Channer—who to my unexpectedly good fortune, definitely is.



Prelude:  Ceratius

The abyss should shut you up.
Sunlight hasn't touched these waters for a million years.  Atmospheres accumulate by the hundreds here, the trenches could swallow a dozen Everests without burping.   They say life itself got started in the deep sea.  Maybe.  It can't have been an easy birth, judging by the life that remains—monstrous things, twisted into nightmare shapes by lightless pressure and sheer chronic starvation.
Even here, inside the hull, the abyss weighs on you like the vault of a cathedral.  It's no place for trivial loudmouth bullshit.  If you speak at all, you keep it down.  But these tourists just don't seem to give a shit.
    Joel Kita's used to hearing a 'scaphe breathe around him, hearing it talk in clicks and hisses.  He relies on those sounds; the readouts only confirm what the beast has already told him by the grumbling of its stomach.  But Ceratius is a leisure craft, fully insulated, packed with excess headroom and reclining couches and little drink'n'drug dispensers set into the back of each seat.   All he can hear today is the cargo, babbling.
He glances back over his shoulder.  The tour guide, a mid-twenties Hindian with a zebra cut—  Preteela someone— flashes him a brief, rueful smile.   She's a relict, and she knows it.  She can't compete with the onboard library, she doesn't come with 3-d animations or wraparound soundtrack.  She's just a prop, really.   These people pay her salary not because she does anything useful, but because she doesn't.  What's the point of being rich if you only buy the essentials?
There are eight of them.  One old guy in a codpiece, still closing on his first century, fiddles with his camera controls.  The others are plugged into headsets, running a program carefully designed to occupy them through the descent without being so impressive that the actual destination is an anticlimax.  It's a thin line, these days.  Simulations are almost always better than real life, and real life gets blamed for the poor showing.  
Joel wishes this particular program was a bit better at holding the cargo's interest; they might shut up if they were paying more attention.  They probably don't care whether Channer's sea monsters live up to the hype anyway.  These people aren't down here because the abyss is impressive, they're here because it costs so much. 
He runs his eyes across the control board.  Even that seems excessive; climate control and indive entertainment take up a good half of the panel.  Bored, he picks one of the headset feeds at random and taps in, sending the signal to a window on his main display. 
An eighteenth-century woodcut of a Kraken comes to life through the miracle of modern animation.  Crudely-rendered tentacles wrap around the masts of a galleon, pull it beneath chunky carved waves.  A female voice, designed to maximize attention from both sexes:  "We have always peopled the sea with monsters—"
Joel tunes out.
Mr. Codpiece comes up behind him, lays a familiar hand on his shoulder.  Joel resists the urge to shrug it off.  That's another problem with these tour subs; no real cockpit, just a set of controls at the front end of the passenger lounge.  You can't shut yourself away from the cargo.
"Quite a layout," Mr. Codpiece says.
Joel reminds himself of his professional duties, and smiles.
"Been doing this run for long?"  The whitecap's skin glows with a golden tan of cultured xanthophylls.  Joel's smile grows a little more brittle.  He's heard all about the benefits, of course; UV protection, higher blood oxygen, more energy — they say it even cuts down on your food requirements, not that any of these people have to worry about grocery money.  Still, it's too bloody freakish for Joel's tastes.  Implants should be made out of meat, or at least plastic.  If people were meant to photosynthesize they'd have leaves.  
"I said—"
Joel nods.  "Couple of years."
A grunt.  "Didn't know Seabed Safaris was around that long."
"I don't work for Seabed Safaris,"  Joel says, as politely as possible.  "I freelance."  The whitecap probably doesn't know any better, comes from a generation when everyone pledged allegiance to the same master year after year.  Nobody thought it was such a bad thing back then.
"Good for you."  Mr. Codpiece gives him a fatherly pat on the shoulder.
Joel nudges the rudders a bit to port.  They've been cruising just off the southeastern shoulder of the rift, floodlights doused; sonar shows a featureless landscape of mud and boulders.  The rift itself is another five or ten minutes away.  On the screen, the tourist program talks about giant squids attacking lifeboats during the Second World War, offers up a parade of archival photos as evidence; human legs,  puckered with fist-sized conical wounds where horn-rimmed suckers cored out gobbets of flesh.
"Nasty.  We going to be seeing any giant squids?"
Joel shakes his head.  "Different tour."
The program launches into a litany of deepwater nasties; a piece of flesh washed up onto a Florida beach, hinting at the existence of octopus thirty meters across.  Giant eel larvae.  Hypothesized monsters that might once have fed on the great whales, anonymously dying out for lack of food.
Joel figures that ninety percent of this is bullshit, and the rest doesn't really count.  Even giant squids don't go down into the really deep sea; hardly anything does.  No food.  Joel's been rooting around down here for years, and he's never seen any real monsters.
Except right here, of course.  He touches a control; outside, a high-frequency speaker begins whining at the abyss.
"Hydrothermal vents bubble and boil along spreading zones in all of the world's oceans," the program chatters, "feeding crowds of giant clams and tubeworms over three meters long."  Stock footage of a vent community.  "And yet, even at the spreading zones, it is only the filter-feeders and muckrakers that become giants.  The fish, vertebrates like ourselves, are few and far between— and only a few centimeters long."  An eelpout wriggles feebly across the display, looking more like a dismembered finger than a fish.
"Except here," the program adds after a dramatic pause.  "For there is something special about this tiny part of the Juan de Fuca Ridge, something unexplained.  Here there be dragons."
Joel hits another control.  External bait lights flash to life across the bioluminescent spectrum; the cabin lights dim.  To the denizens of the rift, drawn in by the sonics, a veritable school of food fish has suddenly appeared in their midst.
"We don't know the secret of the Channer Vent.  We don't know how it creates its strange and fascinating giants."  The program's visual display goes dark.  "We only know that here, on the shoulder of the Axial Volcano, we have finally tracked the monsters to their lair."
Something thumps against the outer hull.  The acoustics of the passenger compartment make the sound seem unnaturally loud.
At last, the passengers shut up.  Mr. Codpiece mutters something and heads back to his seat, a giant chloroplast in a hurry.
"This concludes our introduction.  The external cameras are linked to your headsets and can be aimed using normal head movements.  Focus and record using the joystick on your right armrest.  You may also wish to enjoy the view directly, through any of the cabin viewports.  If you require assistance our guide and pilot are at your service.  Seabed Safaris welcomes you to the Channer Vent, and hopes that you enjoy the remainder of your tour." 
    Two more thumps.  A grey flash out the forward port; a sinuous belly caught for a moment in the headlight, a swirl of fin.  On Joel's systems board, icons representing the outside cams dip and wiggle.
Superfluous Preteela slides into the copilot's seat.  "Regular feeding frenzy out there."
Joel lowers his voice.  "In here.  Out there.  What's the difference?" 
She smiles, a safe, silent gesture of agreement.  She's got a great smile.  Almost makes up for the striped hair.  Joel catches sight of something on the back of her left hand; looks like a ref tattoo, but somehow he doubts that it's authentic.  Fashion statement, more likely. 
"You sure they can spare you?" he asks wryly.  
She looks back.  The cargo's starting up again:  Look at that.  Hey,  it broke its tooth on us.  Christ aren't they ugly—
"They'll manage," Preteela says.
    Something looms up on the other side of the viewport:  mouth like a sackful of needles, a tendril hanging from the lower jaw with a glowing bulb on the end.  The jaw gapes wide enough to dislocate, snaps shut.  Its teeth slide harmlessly across the viewport.  A flat black eye glares in at them.
"What's that?" Preteela wants to know.
"You're the tour guide."
"Never seen anything like it before."
"Me neither."  He sends a trickle of electricity out through the hull.  The monster, startled, flashes off into the darkness.  Intermittent impacts resonate through Ceratius, drawing renewed gasps from the cargo.
"How long until we're actually at Channer?"
Joel glances at tactical.  "We're pretty much there already.  Medium-sized hot fissure about fifty meters to the left."
"What's that?"  A row of bright dots, evenly spaced, has just moved onto the screen. 
"Surveyer's stakes."  Another row marches into range behind the first.  "For the geothermal program, you know?"
"How about a quick drive-by?  I bet those generators are pretty impressive."
"I don't think the generators are in yet.  They're just laying the foundations."
"It'd still make a nice addition to the tour."
"We're supposed to steer clear.   We'd catch royal shit if anyone's out there."
"Well?"  That smile again, more calculated this time.  "Is there?"
"Probably not," Joel admits.  Construction's been on hold for a couple of weeks, a fact which he finds particularly irritating;  he's up for some fairly hefty contracts if the Grid Authority ever gets off its corporate ass and finishes what they started.
Preteela looks at him expectantly.  Joel shrugs.  "It's pretty unstable in there.  Could get bumped around a bit."
"Dangerous?"
"Depends on your definition.  Probably not."
"So let's do it."  Preteela lays a conspiratorial hand briefly on his shoulder.
Ceratius noses around to a new heading.  Joel kills the bait lights and cranks the sonics up for one screeching, farewell burst.  The monsters outside — those that haven't already retired gracefully, their tiny fish brains having figured out that metal is inedible — run screaming into the night, lateral lines burning.  There's a moment of surprised silence from the cargo.  Preteela Someone steps smoothly into the gap.  "Folks, we're taking a small detour to check out a new arrival on the rift.  If you tap into the sonar feed you'll see that we're approaching a checkerboard of acoustic beacons.  The Grid Authority has laid these out in the course of constructing one of the new geothermal stations we've been hearing so much about.   As you may know, similar projects are underway at spreading zones all the way from the Galapagos to the Aleutians.  When these go online, people will actually be living full-time here on the rift—"
Joel can't believe it.  Preteela's big chance to scoop the library and she ends up talking exactly like it does.  He quietly aborts a midbrain fantasy he's been nurturing.  Try to get into fantasy-Preteela's jumpsuit now and she'd probably start reciting a cheery blow-by-blow.
He switches on the external floods.  Mud.  More mud.  On sonar the grid crawls towards them, a monotonous constellation.
    Something catches Ceratius, slews it around.  The hull thermistor spikes briefly.
    "Thermal, folks." Joel calls back over his shoulder.  "Nothing to worry about." 
    A dim coppery sun resolves to starboard.  It's a torch on a pole, basically, a territorial marker beating back the abyss with a sodium bulb and a VLF heartbeat.  It's the Grid Authority, pissing on a rock for all and sundry:  This is our hellhole. 
    The line of towers stretches away to port, each crowned by a floodlight.  Intersecting it, another line recedes directly ahead like streetlights on a smoggy night.  They shine down on a strange unfinished landscape of plastic and metal.  Great metal casings lie against the bottom like derailed boxcars.  Teardrop ROVs sit dormant on flat plastic puddles frozen harder than basalt.   Sharp-edged conduits protrude from those congealed surfaces like hollow bones sawn off below the joint.
    Way up on one of the port towers, something dark and fleshy assaults the light.
    Joels checks the camera icons:  all zoomed, pointing up and left.  Preteela, conserving O2, has retired her patter while the whitecaps gape.   Fine.  They want more mindless piscine violence, give 'em more mindless piscine violence.  Ceratius angles up and to port. 
    It's an anglerfish.  She bashes herself repeatedly against the floodlight, oblivious to Ceratius' approach.  Her dorsal spine lashes;  the lure at its end, a glowing worm-shaped thing, luminesces furiously.
    Preteela's back at his shoulder.  "It's really doing a number on that light, isn't it?" 
    She's right.  The top of the transponder is shaking under the impact of the big fish's blows, which is odd; these beasts are big, but they aren't very strong.  And come to think of it, the tower's shaking back and forth even when the angler isn't touching it…
    "Oh, shit."  Joel grabs the controls.  Ceratius rears up like something living.  Transponder glow drops off the bottom of the viewport;  total darkness drops in from above, swallowing the view.  Startled shouts from the cargo.  Joel ignores them.
    On all sides, the dull distant sound of something roaring.
    Joel hits the throttle.  Ceratius climbs.  Something slaps from behind; the stern slides to port, pulling the bow back after it. The blackness beyond the viewport boils sudden muddy brown against the cabin lights.
    The hull thermister spikes twice, three times.  Ambient temperature flips from 4?C to 280, then back again.  At lesser pressures the Ceratius would be dropping through live steam.  Here it only spins, skidding for traction against the superheated water.
    Finally, it finds some.  Ceratius ascends into welcome icewater.  A fish skeleton pirouettes past the viewport, all teeth and spines, every vestige of flesh boiled away.
    Joel looks back over his shoulder.  Preteela's fingers are locked around the back of his seat, their knuckles the same color as the dancing bones outside.  The cargo are dead quiet.
    "Another thermal?" Preteela says in a shaky voice. 
    Joel shakes his head.  "Seabed cracked open.  It's really thin around here."  He manages a brief laugh.  "Told you things could get a bit unstable."
    "Uh huh."   She releases her grip on Joel's chair.  Fingernail imprints linger in the foam.  She leans over, whispers "Bring the cabin lights up a bit, will you?  Sort of a nice living-room level—" and then she's headed aft, tending the cargo:  "Well, that was exciting.  But Joel assures us that little blowups like this happen all the time.  Nothing to be worried about, although they can catch you offguard."  
Joel raises the cabin lights.  The cargo sit quietly, still ostriched into their headsets.  Preteela bustles among them, smoothing feathers.  "And of course we still have the rest of our tour to look forward to…"
He ups the gain on sonar, focusses aft.  A luminous storm swirls across the tactical display.  Beneath it, a fresh ridge of oozing rock disfigures the GA's construction grid. 
Preteela is back at his elbow.  "Joel?" 
"Yeah."
"They say people are going to be living down there?"
    "Uh huh."
    "Wow. Who?"
He looks at her.  "Haven't you seen the PR threads?  Only the best and the brightest.  Holding back the everlasting night to stoke the fires of civilization."
"Seriously, Joel.  Who?"
    He shrugs.  "Fucked if I know."


Benthos


Duet



CONSTRICTOR

When the lights go out in Beebe Station, you can hear the metal groan.
Lenie Clarke lies on her bunk, listening.  Overhead, past pipes and wires and eggshell plating, three kilometers of black ocean try to crush her.  She feels the Rift underneath, tearing open the seabed with strength enough to move a continent.  She lies there in that fragile refuge and she hears Beebe's armor shifting by microns, hears its seams creak not quite below the threshold of human hearing.  God is a sadist on the Juan de Fuca Rift, and His name is Physics.
How did they talk me into this?  she wonders.  Why did I come down here? But she already knows the answer. 
She hears Ballard moving out in the corridor.  Clarke envies Ballard. Ballard never screws up, always seems to have her life under control.  She almost seems happy down here.
Clarke rolls off her bunk and fumbles for a switch.  Her cubby floods with dismal light.  Pipes and access panels crowd the wall beside her; aesthetics run a distant second to functionality when you're three thousand meters down. She turns and catches sight of a slick black amphibian in the bulkhead mirror.
It still happens, occasionally.  She can sometimes forget what they've done to her.
It takes a conscious effort to feel the machines lurking where her left lung used to be.  She's so acclimated to the chronic ache in her chest, to that subtle inertia of plastic and metal as she moves, that she's scarcely aware of them any more.  She can still feel the memory of what it was to be fully human, and mistake that ghost for honest sensation.
Such respites never last.  There are mirrors everywhere in Beebe; they're supposed to increase the apparent size of one's personal space.  Sometimes Clarke shuts her eyes to hide from the reflections forever being thrown back at her.  It doesn't help.  She clenches her lids and feels the corneal caps beneath them, covering her eyes like smooth white cataracts. 
She climbs out of her cubby and moves along the corridor to the lounge. Ballard is waiting there, dressed in a diveskin and the usual air of confidence. 
Ballard stands up.  "Ready to go?"  
"You're in charge," Clarke says.
"Only on paper."  Ballard smiles.  "No pecking order down here, Lenie.  As far as I'm concerned, we're equals."  After two days on the rift Clarke is still surprised by the frequency with which Ballard smiles.  Ballard smiles at the slightest provocation.  It doesn't always seem real.
Something hits Beebe from the outside.
Ballard's smile falters.  They hear it again; a wet, muffled thud through the station's titanium skin.
"It takes a while to get used to," Ballard says, "doesn't it?" 
And again.
"I mean, that sounds big—"
"Maybe we should turn the lights off," Clarke suggests.  She knows they won't.  Beebe's exterior floodlights burn around the clock, an electric campfire pushing back the darkness.  They can't see it from inside—Beebe has no windows— but somehow they draw comfort from the knowledge of that unseen fire—
Thud!
—most of the time.
"Remember back in training?" Ballard says over the sound, "When they told us that the fish were usually so—small…" 
Her voice trails off.  Beebe creaks slightly.  They listen for a while. There's no other sound.
"It must've gotten tired," Ballard says. "You'd think they'd figure it out."  She moves to the ladder and climbs downstairs.
Clarke follows her, a bit impatiently.  There are sounds in Beebe that worry her far more than the futile attack of some misguided fish.  Clarke can hear tired alloys negotiating surrender.  She can feel the ocean looking for a way in.  What if it finds one?  The whole weight of the Pacific could drop down and turn her into jelly.  Any time.
Better to face it outside, where she knows what's coming.  All she can do in here is wait for it to happen.
#
Going outside is like drowning, once a day. 
Clarke stands facing Ballard, diveskin sealed, in an airlock that barely holds both of them.  She has learned to tolerate the forced proximity; the glassy armor on her eyes helps a bit.  Fuse seals, check headlamp, test injector; the ritual takes her, step by reflexive step, to that horrible moment when she awakens the machines sleeping within her, and changes.
When she catches her breath, and loses it.
When a vacuum opens, somewhere in her chest, that swallows the air she holds.  When her remaining lung shrivels in its cage, and her guts collapse; when myoelectric demons flood her sinuses and middle ears with isotonic saline.  When every pocket of internal gas disappears in the time it takes to draw a breath. 
It always feels the same.  The sudden, overwhelming nausea; the narrow confines of the airlock holding her erect when she tries to fall; seawater churning on all sides.  Her face goes under; vision blurs, then clears as her corneal caps adjust. 
She collapses against the walls and wishes she could scream.  The floor of the airlock drops away like a gallows.  Lenie Clarke falls writhing into the abyss.
#
They come out of the freezing darkness, headlights blazing, into an oasis of sodium luminosity.  Machines grow everywhere at the Throat, like metal weeds.  Cables and conduits spiderweb across the seabed in a dozen directions. The main pumps stand over twenty meters high, a regiment of submarine monoliths fading from sight on either side.  Overhead floodlights bathe the jumbled structures in perpetual twilight.
They stop for a moment, hands resting on the line that guided them here.  
"I'll never get used to it," Ballard grates in a caricature of her usual voice. 
Clarke glances at her wrist thermistor.  "Thirty four Centigrade."  The words buzz, metallic, from her larynx.  It feels so wrong to talk without breathing. 
Ballard lets go of the rope and launches herself into the light.  After a moment, breathless, Clarke follows.
There's so much power here, so much wasted strength.  Here the continents themselves do ponderous battle.  Magma freezes; seawater boils; the very floor of the ocean is born by painful centimeters each year.  Human machinery does not make energy, here at Dragon's Throat; it merely hangs on and steals some insignificant fraction of it back to the mainland. 
Clarke flies through canyons of metal and rock, and knows what it is to be a parasite.  She looks down.  Shellfish the size of boulders, crimson worms three meters long crowd the seabed between the machines.  Legions of bacteria, hungry for sulfur, lace the water with milky veils.
The water fills with a sudden terrible cry. 
It doesn't sound like a scream. It sounds as though a great harp string is vibrating in slow motion.  But Ballard is screaming, through some  reluctant interface of flesh and metal:
"LENIE—"
Clarke turns in time to see her own arm disappear into a mouth that seems impossibly huge.
Teeth like scimitars clamp down on her shoulder.  Clarke stares into a scaly black face half a meter across.  Some tiny dispassionate part of her searches for eyes in that monstrous fusion of spines and teeth and gnarled flesh, and fails.  How can it see me?  she wonders. 
Then the pain reaches her.
She feels her arm being wrenched from its socket.  The creature thrashes, shaking its head back and forth, trying to tear her into chunks.  Every tug sets her nerves screaming.
She goes limp.  Please get it over with if you're going to kill me just please God make it quick— She feels the urge to vomit, but the 'skin over her mouth and her own collapsed insides won't let her.
She shuts out the pain.  She's had plenty of practice.  She pulls inside, abandoning her body to ravenous vivisection; and from far away she feels the twisting of her attacker grow suddenly erratic.  There's another creature at her side, with arms and legs and a knife—you know, a knife, like the one you've got strapped to your leg and completely forgot about—and suddenly the monster is gone, its grip broken.
Clarke tells her neck muscles to work.  It's like operating a marionette. Her head turns.  She sees Ballard locked in combat with something as big as she is.  Only — Ballard is tearing it to pieces, with her bare hands.  Its icicle teeth splinter and snap.  Dark icewater courses from its wounds, tracing mortal convulsions with smoke-trails of suspended gore.
The creature spasms weakly.  Ballard pushes it away.  A dozen smaller fish dart into the light and begin tearing at the carcass.  Photophores along their sides flash like frantic rainbows.
Clarke watches from the other side of the world.  The pain in her side keeps its distance, a steady, pulsing ache.  She looks; her arm is still there.  She can even move her fingers without any trouble.  I've had worse, she thinks.  
Then:  Why am I still alive?
Ballard appears at her side; her lens-covered eyes shine like photophores themselves. 
"Jesus Christ," Ballard says in a distorted whisper.  "Lenie?  You okay?"  
Clarke dwells on the inanity of the question for a moment.  But surprisingly, she feels intact.  "Yeah."
And if not, she knows, it's her own damn fault.  She just lay there.   She just waited to die.  She was asking for it.
She's always asking for it.
#
Back in the airlock, the water recedes around them.  And within them; Clarke's stolen breath, released at last, races back along visceral channels, reinflating lung and gut and spirit.
Ballard splits the face seal on her 'skin and her words tumble into the wetroom.  "Jesus.  Jesus!  I don't believe it!  My God, did you see that thing!  They get so huge around here!"  She passes her hands across her face; her corneal caps come off, milky hemispheres dropping from enormous hazel eyes.  "And to think they're usually just a few centimeters long..."
She starts to strip down, unzipping her 'skin along the forearms, talking the whole time.  "And yet it was almost fragile, you know?  Hit it hard enough and it just came apart!  Jesus!"  Ballard always removes her uniform indoors.  Clarke suspects she'd rip the recycler out of her own thorax if she could, throw it in a corner with the 'skin and the eyecaps until the next time it was needed.
Maybe she's got her other lung in her cabin, Clarke muses.  Maybe she keeps it in a jar, and she stuffs it back into her chest at night...  She feels a bit dopey; probably just an aftereffect of the neuroinhibitors her implants put out whenever she's outside.  Small price to pay to keep my brain from shorting out—  I really shouldn't mind...
Ballard peels her 'skin down to the waist.  Just under her left breast, the electrolyser intake pokes out through her ribcage.
Clarke stares vaguely at that perforated disk in Ballard's flesh.  The ocean goes into us there, she thinks.  The old knowledge seems newly significant, somehow.  We suck it into us and steal its oxygen and spit it out again.
Prickly numbness is spreading, leaking through her shoulder into her chest and neck.  Clarke shakes her head, once, to clear it.
She sags suddenly, against the hatchway.
Am I in shock?  Am I fainting?
"I mean—" Ballard stops, looks at Clarke with an expression of sudden concern.  "Jesus, Lenie.  You look terrible.  You shouldn't have told me you were okay if you weren't."
The tingling reaches the base of Clarke's skull.  "I'm — okay," she says.  "Nothing broke.  I'm just bruised."
"Garbage.  Take off your 'skin."
Clarke straightens, with effort.  The numbness recedes a bit.  "It's nothing I can't take care of myself."
Don't touch me.  Please don't touch me.
Ballard steps forward without a word and unseals the 'skin around Clarke's forearm.  She peels back the material and exposes an ugly purple bruise.  She looks at Clarke with one raised eyebrow.
"Just a bruise,"  Clarke says.  "I'll take care of it, really.  Thanks anyway."  She pulls her hand away from Ballard's ministrations.
Ballard looks at her for a moment.  She smiles ever so slightly.
"Lenie," she says, "there's no need to feel embarrassed."
"About what?"
"You know.  Me having to rescue you.  You going to pieces when that thing attacked.  It was perfectly understandable.  Most people have a rough time adjusting.  I'm just one of the lucky ones."
Right.  You've always been one of the lucky ones, haven't you?  I know your kind, Ballard, you've never failed at anything...
"You don't have to feel ashamed about it," Ballard reassures her.
"I don't," Clarke says, honestly.  She doesn't feel much of anything any more.  Just the tingling.  And the tension.  And a vague sort of wonder that she's even alive.
#
The bulkhead is sweating.
The deep sea lays icy hands on the metal and, inside, Clarke watches the humid atmosphere bead and run down the wall.  She sits rigid on her bunk under dim fluorescent light, every wall of the cubby within easy reach.  The ceiling is too low.  The room is too narrow.  She feels the ocean compressing the station around her.
And all I can do is wait...
The anabolic salve on her injuries is warm and soothing.  Clarke probes the purple flesh of her arm with practiced fingers.  The diagnostic tools in the Med cubby have vindicated her.  She's lucky, this time; bones intact, epidermis unbroken.  She seals up her 'skin, hiding the damage.
She shifts on the pallet, turns to face the inside wall.  Her reflection stares back at her through eyes like frosted glass.  She watches the image, admires its perfect mimicry of each movement.  Flesh and phantom move together, bodies masked, faces neutral.
That's me, she thinks.  That's what I look like now.  She tries to read what lies behind that glacial facade.  Am I bored, horny, upset?  How to tell, with her eyes hidden behind those corneal opacities?  She sees no trace of the tension she always feels.  I could be terrified.  I could be pissing in my 'skin and no one would know.
She leans forward.  The reflection comes to meet her.  They stare at each other, white to white, ice to ice.  For a moment, they almost forget Beebe's ongoing war against pressure.  For a moment, they don't mind the claustrophobic solitude that grips them.
How many times, Clarke wonders, have I wanted eyes as dead as these?
#
Beebe's metal viscera crowd the corridor beyond her cubby.  Clarke can barely stand erect.  A few steps bring her into the lounge.
Ballard, back in shirtsleeves, is at one of the library terminals.  "Rickets," she says.
"What?"
"Fish down here don't get enough trace elements.  They're rotten with deficiency diseases.  Doesn't matter how fierce they are.  They bite too hard, they break their teeth on us."
Clarke stabs buttons on the food processor; the machine grumbles at her touch.  "I thought there was all sorts of food at the rift. That's why things got so big."
"There's a lot of food.  Just not very good quality."
A vaguely edible lozenge of sludge oozes from the processor onto Clarke's plate.  She eyes it for a moment.  I can relate.
"You're going to eat in your gear?" Ballard asks, as Clarke sits down at the lounge table.
Clarke blinks at her.  "Yeah.  Why?"
"Oh, nothing.  It would just be nice to talk to someone with pupils in their eyes, you know?"
"Sorry.  I can take them off if you —"
"No, it's no big thing.  I can live with it."  Ballard turns off the library and sits down across from Clarke.  "So, how do you like the place so far?"
Clarke shrugs and keeps eating.
"I'm glad we're only down here for a year," Ballard says.  "This place could get to you after a while."
"It could be worse."
"Oh, I'm not complaining.  I was looking for a challenge, after all.  What about you?"
"Me?"
"What brings you down here?  What are you looking for?"
Clarke doesn't answer for a moment.  "I don't know, really," she says at last.  "Privacy, I guess."
Ballard looks up.  Clarke stares back, her face neutral.
"Well, I'll leave you to it, then," Ballard says pleasantly.
Clarke watches her disappear down the corridor.  She hears the sound of a cubby hatch hissing shut.
Give it up, Ballard, she thinks.  I'm not the sort of person you really want to know.
#
Almost start of the morning shift.  The food processor disgorges Clarke's breakfast with its usual reluctance.  Ballard, in Communications, is just getting off the phone.  A moment later she appears in the hatchway.
"Management says—"  She stops.  "You've got blue eyes."
Clarke smiles faintly.  "You've seen them before."
"I know.  It's just kind of surprising, it's been a while since I've seen you without your caps in."
Clarke sits down with her breakfast.  "So, what does Management say?" 
"We're on schedule.  Rest of the crew comes down in three weeks, we go online in four."  Ballard sits down across from Clarke.  "I wonder sometimes why we're not online right now."
"I guess they just want to be sure everything works." 
"Still, it seems like a long time for a dry run.  And you'd think that — well, they'd want to get the geothermal program up and running as fast as possible, after all that's happened."
After Lepreau and Winshire melted down, you mean. 
"And there's something else," Ballard says.  "I can't get through to Piccard."
Clarke looks up.  Piccard Station is anchored on the Galapagos Rift; it is not a particularly stable mooring.
"You ever meet the couple there?"  Ballard asks.  "Ken Lubin, Lana Cheung?"  
Clarke shakes her head.  "They went through before me.  I never met any of the other Rifters except you."
"Nice people.  I thought I'd call them up, see how things were going at Piccard, but nobody can get through."
"Line down?"
"They say it's probably something like that.  Nothing serious.  They're sending a 'scaphe down to check it out." 
Maybe the seabed opened up and swallowed them whole, Clarke thinks.  Maybe the hull had a weak plate—one's all it would take—
Something creaks, deep in Beebe's superstructure.  Clarke looks around. The walls seem to have moved closer while she wasn't looking.
"Sometimes," she says, "I wish we didn't keep Beebe at surface pressure. Sometimes I wish we were pumped up to ambient.  To take the strain off the hull."  She knows it's an impossible dream; most gases kill outright when breathed at three hundred atmospheres.  Even oxygen would do you in if it got above one or two percent.
Ballard shivers dramatically.  "If you want to risk breathing ninety-nine percent hydrogen, you're welcome to it.  I'm happy the way things are."  She smiles.  "Besides, you have any idea how long it would take to decompress afterwards?"
In the Systems cubby, something bleats for attention. 
"Seismic.  Wonderful."  Ballard disappears into Comm.  Clarke follows. 
An amber line is writhing across one of the displays. It looks like the EEG of someone caught in a nightmare.
"Get your eyes back in," Ballard says.  "The Throat's acting up."
#
They can hear it all the way to Beebe; a malign, almost electrical hiss from the direction of the Throat.  Clarke follows Ballard towards it, one hand running lightly along the guide rope.  The distant smudge of light that marks their destination seems wrong, somehow.  The color is different.  It ripples.
They swim into its glowing nimbus and see why.  The Throat is on fire.
Sapphire auroras slide flickering across the generators. At the far end of the array, almost invisible with distance, a pillar of smoke swirls up into the darkness like a great tornado.  
The sound it makes fills the abyss.  Clarke closes her eyes for a moment, and hears rattlesnakes.
"Jesus!" Ballard shouts over the noise. "It's not supposed to do that!"
Clarke checks her thermistor.  It won't settle; water temperature goes from four degrees to thirty eight and back again, within seconds.  A myriad ephemeral currents tug at them as they watch.
"Why the light show?" Clarke calls back.
"I don't know!" Ballard answers.  "Bioluminescence, I guess!  Heat-sensitive bacteria!" 
Without warning, the tumult dies.
The ocean empties of sound.  Phosphorescent spiderwebs wriggle dimly on the metal and vanish.  In the distance, the tornado sighs and fragments into a few transient dust devils.  
A gentle rain of black soot begins to fall in the copper light.
"Smoker," Ballard says into the sudden stillness.  "A big one."
They swim to the place where the geyser erupted.  There's a fresh wound in the seabed, a gash several meters long, between two of the generators.
"This wasn't supposed to happen," Ballard says.  "That's why they built here, for crying out loud!  It was supposed to be stable!"
"The rift's never stable," Clarke replies.  Not much point in being here if it was.  
Ballard swims up through the fallout and pops an access plate on one of the generators.  "Well, according to this there's no damage," she calls down, after looking inside.  "Hang on, let me switch channels here—"
Clarke touches one of the cylindrical sensors strapped to her waist, and stares into the fissure.  I should be able to fit through there, she decides.
And does.
"We were lucky," Ballard is saying above her.  "The other generators are okay too. Oh, wait a second; number two has a clogged cooling duct, but it's not serious. Backups can handle it until—get out of there!"
Clarke looks up, one hand on the sensor she's planting.  Ballard stares down at her through a chimney of fresh rock.
"Are you crazy?"  Ballard shouts.  "That's an active smoker!"
Clarke looks down again, deeper into the shaft.  It twists out of sight in the mineral haze.  "We need temperature readings," she says, "from inside the mouth."
"Get out of there!  It could go off again and fry you!"
I suppose it could at that, Clarke thinks.  "It already blew," she calls back.  "It'll take a while to build up a fresh head."  She twists a knob on the sensor; tiny explosive bolts blast into the rock, anchoring the device.
"Get out of there, now!" 
"Just a second."  Clarke turns the sensor on and kicks up out of the seabed.  Ballard grabs her arm as she emerges, starts to drag her away from the smoker. 
Clarke stiffens and pulls free.  "Don't—" touch me!  She catches herself. "I'm out, okay?  You don't have to—"
"Further." Ballard keeps swimming.  "Over here."
They're near the edge of the light now, the floodlit Throat on one side, blackness on the other.  Ballard faces Clarke.  "Are you out of your mind?  We could have gone back to Beebe for a drone!  We could have planted it on remote!"
Clarke doesn't answer.  She sees something moving in the distance behind Ballard.  "Watch your back," she says.
Ballard turns, and sees the gulper sliding toward them.  It undulates through the water like brown smoke, silent and endless; Clarke can't see the creature's tail, although several meters of serpentine flesh have come out of the darkness.
Ballard goes for her knife.  After a moment, Clarke does too.
The gulper's jaw drops open like a great jagged scoop.
Ballard begins to launch herself at the thing, knife upraised.
Clarke puts her hand out.  "Wait a minute.  It's not coming at us."
The front end of the gulper is about ten meters distant now.  Its tail pulls free of the murk.
"Are you crazy?" Ballard moves clear of Clarke's hand, still watching the monster.
"Maybe it isn't hungry," Clarke says.  She can see its eyes, two tiny unwinking spots glaring at them from the tip of the snout.
"They're always hungry.  Did you sleep through the briefings?"
The gulper closes its mouth and passes.  It extends around them now, in a great meandering arc.  The head turns back to look at them.  It opens its mouth.
"Fuck this," Ballard says, and charges.
Her first stroke opens a meter-long gash in the creature's side.  The gulper stares at Ballard for a moment, as if astonished.  Then, ponderously, it thrashes.
Clarke watches without moving.  Why can't she just let it go?  Why does she always have to prove she's better than everything?
Ballard strikes again; this time she slashes into a great tumorous swelling that has to be the stomach.
She frees the things inside.
They spill out through the wound; two huge giganturids and some misshapen creature Clarke doesn't recognize. One of the giganturids is still alive, and in a foul mood.  It locks its teeth around the first thing it encounters.
Ballard.  From behind.
"Lenie!"  Ballard's knife hand is swinging in staccato arcs.  The giganturid begins to come apart.  Its jaws remain locked.  The convulsing gulper crashes into Ballard and sends her spinning to the bottom.
Finally, Clarke begins to move.  
The gulper collides with Ballard again.  Clarke moves in low, hugging the bottom, and pulls the other woman clear.
Ballard's knife continues to dip and twist.  The giganturid is a mutilated wreck behind the gills, but its grip remains unbroken.  Ballard can't twist around far enough to reach the skull. Clarke comes in from behind and takes the creature's head in her hands.
It stares at her, malevolent and unthinking.
"Kill it!" Ballard shouts. "Jesus, what are you waiting for?"
Clarke closes her eyes, and clenches.  The skull in her hand splinters like cheap plastic.
There is a silence.
After a while, she opens her eyes.  The gulper is gone, fled back into darkness to heal or die.  But Ballard's still there, and Ballard is angry.
"What's wrong with you?" she says.
Clarke unclenches her fists.  Bits of bone and jellied flesh float about her fingers. 
"You're supposed to back me up!  Why are you so damned — passive all the time?"  
"Sorry."  Sometimes it works. 
Ballard reaches behind her back.  "I'm cold.  I think it punctured my diveskin—"
Clarke swims behind her and looks. "A couple of holes.  How are you otherwise?  Anything feel broken?"
"It broke through the diveskin," Ballard says, as if to herself.  "And when that gulper hit me, it could have—"  She turns to Clarke and her voice, even distorted, carries a shocked uncertainty. "—I could have been killed.  I could have been killed!" 
For an instant, it's as though Ballard's 'skin and eyes and self-assurance have all been stripped away.  For the first time Clarke can see through to the weakness beneath, growing like a delicate tracery of hairline cracks.  
You can screw up too, Ballard.   It isn't all fun and games.   You know that now.
It hurts, doesn't it?
Somewhere inside, the slightest touch of sympathy.  "It's okay," Clarke says. "Jeanette, it's—"
"You idiot!" Ballard hisses.  She stares at Clarke like some malign and sightless old woman. "You just floated there!  You just let it happen to me!"
Clarke feels her guard snap up again, just in time.  This isn't just anger, she realizes.  This isn't just the heat of the moment.  She doesn't like me.  She doesn't like me at all.
 	And then, dully surprised that she hasn't seen it before:   
She never did.



A NICHE
	Beebe Station floats tethered above the seabed, a gunmetal-gray planet ringed by a belt of equatorial floodlights.  There's an airlock for divers at the south pole and a docking hatch for 'scaphes at the north.  In between there are girders and anchor lines, conduits and cables, metal armor and Lenie Clarke.
She's doing a routine visual check on the hull; standard procedure, once a week.  Ballard is inside, testing some equipment in the communications cubby.  This is not entirely within the spirit of the buddy system.  Clarke prefers it this way.  Relations have been civil over the past couple of days—Ballard even resurrects her patented chumminess on occasion—but the more time they spend together, the more forced things get.  Eventually, Clarke knows, something is going to break.
Besides, out here it seems only natural to be alone.
She's examining a cable clamp when a razormouth charges into the light. It's about two meters long, and hungry.  It rams directly into the nearest of Beebe's floodlamps, mouth agape.  Several teeth shatter against the crystal lens. The razormouth twists to one side, knocking the hull with its tail, and swims off until barely visible against the dark. 
Clarke watches, fascinated.  The razormouth swims back and forth, back and forth, then charges again.
The flood weathers the impact easily, doing more damage to its attacker.   Over and over again the fish batters itself against the light.  Finally, exhausted, it sinks twitching down to the muddy bottom.
"Lenie?  Are you okay?"
Clarke feels the words buzzing in her lower jaw.  She trips the sender in her diveskin:  "I'm okay." 
"I heard something out there," Ballard says.  "I just wanted to make sure you were—"
"I'm fine," Clarke says.  "Just a fish."
"They never learn, do they?"
"No.  I guess not.  See you later."
"See—"
Clarke switches off her receiver.
Poor stupid fish.  How many millennia did it take for them to learn that bioluminescence equals food?  How long will Beebe have to sit here before they learn that electric light doesn't?
We could keep our headlights off.  Maybe they'd leave us alone— 
She stares out past Beebe's electric halo.  There is so much blackness there.  It almost hurts to look at it.  Without lights, without sonar, how far could she go into that viscous shroud and still return? 
Clarke kills her headlight.  Night edges a bit closer, but Beebe's lights keep it at bay.  Clarke turns until she's face to face with the darkness. She crouches like a spider against Beebe's hull.  
She pushes off.
The darkness embraces her.  She swims, not looking back, until her legs grow tired.  She doesn't know how far she's come.
But it must be light-years.  The ocean is full of stars.
Behind her, the station shines brightest, with coarse yellow rays. In the opposite direction, she can barely make out the Throat, an insignificant sunrise on the horizon.
Everywhere else, living constellations punctuate the dark.  Here, a string of pearls blink sexual advertisements at two-second intervals.  Here, a sudden flash leaves diversionary afterimages swarming across Clarke's field of view; something flees under cover of her momentary blindness.  There, a counterfeit worm twists lazily in the current, invisibly tied to the roof of some predatory mouth.
There are so many of them. 
She feels a sudden surge in the water, as if something big has just passed very close.  A delicious thrill dances through her body.
It nearly touched me, she thinks.  I wonder what it was.  The rift is full of monsters who don't know when to quit.  It doesn't matter how much they eat. Their voracity is as much a part of them as their elastic bellies, their unhinging jaws.  Ravenous dwarves attack giants twice their own size, and sometimes win.  The abyss is a desert; no one can afford the luxury of waiting for better odds.  
But even a desert has oases, and sometimes the deep hunters find them. They come upon the malnourishing abundance of the rift and gorge themselves; their descendants grow huge and bloated over such delicate bones—
My light was off, and it left me alone.  I wonder— 
She turns it back on.  Her vision clouds in the sudden glare, then clears. The ocean reverts to unrelieved black.  No nightmares accost her.  The beam lights empty water wherever she points it.
She switches it off.  There's a moment of absolute darkness while her eyecaps adjust to the reduced light.  Then the stars come out again. 
They are so beautiful.  Lenie Clarke rests on the bottom of the ocean and watches the abyss sparkle around her.  And she almost laughs as she realizes, three thousand meters from the nearest sunlight, that it's only dark when the lights are on.
#
"What the hell is wrong with you?  You've been gone for over three hours, did you know that?  Why didn't you answer me?"
Clarke bends over and removes her fins.  "I guess I turned my receiver off," she says.  "I was—wait a second, did you say—"
"You guess?  Have you forgotten every safety reg they drilled into us? You're supposed to have your receiver on from the moment you leave Beebe until you get back!"
"Did you say three hours?" 
"I couldn't even come out after you, I couldn't find you on sonar!  I just had to sit here and hope you'd show up!"
It only seems a few minutes since she pushed off into the darkness. Clarke climbs up into the lounge, suddenly chilled.
"Where were you, Lenie?" Ballard demands, coming up behind her.  Clarke hears the slightest plaintive tone in her voice.
"I—I must've been on the bottom," Clarke says.  "that's why sonar didn't get me. I didn't go far."  
Was I asleep?  What was I doing for three hours?
"I was just — wandering around.  I lost track of the time.  I'm sorry."
"Not good enough.  Don't do it again." 
There's a brief silence.  It's ended by the sudden, familiar impact of flesh on metal.
"Christ!"  Ballard snaps.  "I'm turning the externals off right now!"
Whatever it is gets in two more hits by the time Ballard reaches Comm.  Clarke hears her punch a couple of buttons.
Ballard comes back into the lounge.  "There.  Now we're invisible."
Something hits them again.  And again.
"Or maybe not," Clarke says. 
Ballard stands in the lounge, listening to the rhythm of the assault.  "They don't show up on sonar," she says, almost whispering.  "Sometimes, when I hear them coming at us, I tune it down to extreme close range.  But it looks right through them."
	"No gas bladders.  Nothing to bounce an echo off of."
	"We show up just fine out there, most of the time.  But not those things.  You can't find them, no matter how high you turn the gain.  They're like ghosts."
"They're not ghosts."  Almost unconsciously, Clarke has been counting the beats:  eight — nine—
Ballard turns to face her.  "They've shut down Piccard," she says, and her voice is small and tight. 
"What?"
"The grid office says it's just some technical problem.  But I've got a friend in Personnel.  I phoned him when you were outside.  He says Lana's in the hospital.  And I get the feeling—"  Ballard shakes her head.  "It sounded like Ken Lubin did something down there.  I think maybe he attacked her." 
Three thumps from outside, in rapid succession.  Clarke can feel Ballard's eyes on her.  The silence stretches.  
"Or maybe not," Ballard says.  "We got all those personality tests.  If he was violent, they would've picked it up before they sent him down." 
Clarke watches her, listens to the pounding of an intermittent fist.
"Or maybe — maybe the rift changed him somehow.  Maybe they misjudged the pressure we'd all be under.  So to speak."  Ballard musters a feeble smile. "Not the physical danger so much as the emotional stress, you know?  Everyday things.  Just being outside could get to you after a while.  Seawater sluicing through your chest.  Not breathing for hours at a time.  It's like—living without a heartbeat—" 
She looks up at the ceiling; the sounds from outside are a bit more erratic, now. 
"Outside's not so bad," Clarke says.  At least you're incompressible.  At least you don't have to worry about the plates giving in.
"I don't think you'd change suddenly.  It would just sort of sneak up on you, little by little.  And then one day you'd just wake up changed, you'd be different somehow, only you'd never have noticed the transition.  Like Ken Lubin." 
She looks at Clarke, and her voice drops a bit.
"And you." 
"Me."  Clarke turns Ballard's words over in her mind, waits for the onset of some reaction.  She feels nothing but her own indifference.  "I don't think you have much to worry about.  I'm not the violent type."
"I know.  I'm not worried about my own safety, Lenie.  I'm worried about yours."
Clarke looks at her from behind the impervious safety of her lenses, and doesn't answer. 
"You've changed since you came down here," Ballard says.  "You're withdrawing from me, you're exposing yourself to unnecessary risks.  I don't know exactly what's happening to you.  It's almost like you're trying to kill yourself." 
"I'm not," Clarke says.  She tries to change the subject.  "Is Lana Cheung all right?"
Ballard studies her for a moment.  She takes the hint.  "I don't know.  I couldn't get any details." 
Clarke feels something knotting up inside her.
"I wonder what she did to set him off?" she murmurs.
Ballard stares at her, openmouthed.  "What she did?  I can't believe you said that!" 
"I only meant—"
"I know what you meant."
The outside pounding has stopped.  Ballard does not relax.  She stands hunched over in those strange, loose-fitting clothes that Drybacks wear, and stares at the ceiling as though she doesn't believe in the silence.  She looks back at Clarke.
"Lenie, you know I don't like to pull rank, but your attitude is putting both of us at risk.  I think this place is really getting to you.  I hope you can get back online here, I really do.  Otherwise I may have to recommend you for a transfer." 
Clarke watches Ballard leave the lounge.  You're lying, she realizes. You're scared to death, and it's not just because I'm changing. 
It's because you are. 
#
Clarke finds out five hours after the fact: something has changed on the ocean floor. 
We sleep and the earth moves she thinks, studying the topographic display. And next time, or the time after, maybe it'll move right out from under us.
I wonder if I'll have time to feel anything.
She turns at a sound behind her.  Ballard is standing in the lounge, swaying slightly.  Her face seems somehow disfigured by the concentric rings in her eyes, by the dark hollows around them.  Naked eyes are beginning to look alien to Clarke.
"The seabed shifted," Clarke says.  "There's a new outcropping about two hundred meters west of us."
"That's odd.  I didn't feel anything."
"It happened about five hours ago.  You were asleep."
Ballard glances up sharply.  Clarke studies the haggard lines of her face. On second thought...
"I — would've woken up,"  Ballard says. She squeezes past Clarke into the cubby and checks the topographic display.
"Two meters high, twelve long," Clarke recites. 
Ballard doesn't answer.  She punches some commands into a keyboard; the topographic image dissolves, reforms into a column of numbers.  
"Just as I thought," she says.  "No heavy seismic activity for over forty-two hours."
"Sonar doesn't lie,"  Clarke says calmly.
"Neither does seismo," Ballard answers.
There's a brief silence.  There's a standard procedure for such things, and they both know what it is. 
"We have to check it out," Clarke says. 
But Ballard only nods.  "Give me a moment to change."
#
They call it a squid; a jet-propelled cylinder about a meter long, with a headlight at the front end and a towbar at the back.  Clarke, floating between Beebe and the seabed, checks it over with one hand.  Her other hand grips a sonar pistol.  She points the pistol into blackness; ultrasonic clicks sweep the night, give her a bearing.
"That way," she says, pointing.
Ballard squeezes down on her own squid's towbar.  The machine pulls her away.  After a moment Clarke follows.  Bringing up the rear, a third squid carries an assortment of sensors in a nylon bag. 
Ballard's traveling at nearly full throttle.  The lamps on her helmet and squid stab the water like twin lighthouse beacons.  Clarke, her own lights doused, catches up about halfway to their destination.  They cruise along a couple of meters over the muddy substrate.
"Your lights,"  Ballard says.
"We don't need them.  Sonar works in the dark."
"Are you breaking regs for the sheer thrill of it, now?"
"The fish down here, they key on things that glow—"
"Turn your lights on.  That's an order."
Clarke doesn't answer.  She watches the beams beside her, Ballard's squid shining steady and unwavering, Ballard's headlamp slicing the water in erratic arcs as she moves her head— 
"I told you," Ballard says, "turn your—Christ!"  
It was just a glimpse, caught for a moment in the sweep of Ballard's headlight.  She jerks her head around and it slides back out of sight.  Then it looms up in the squid's beam, huge and terrible.
The abyss is grinning at them, teeth bared.
A mouth stretches across the width of the beam, extends into darkness on either side.  It is crammed with conical teeth the size of human hands, and they do not look the least bit fragile.
Ballard makes a strangled sound and dives into the mud.  The benthic ooze boils up around her in a seething cloud; she disappears in a torrent of planktonic corpses.
Lenie Clarke stops and waits, unmoving. She stares transfixed at that threatening smile.  Her whole body feels electrified, she's never been so explicitly aware of herself.  Every nerve fires and freezes at the same time. She is terrified.
But she's also, somehow, completely in control of herself.  She reflects on this paradox as Ballard's abandoned squid slows and stops itself, scant meters from that endless row of teeth.  She wonders at her own analytical clarity as the third squid, with its burden of sensors, decelerates past and takes up position beside Ballard's.
There in the light, the grin does not change.
Clarke raises her sonar pistol and fires.  We're here, she realizes, checking the readout.   That's the outcropping.
She swims closer.  The smile hangs there, enigmatic and enticing.  Now she can see bits of bone at the roots of the teeth, and tatters of decomposed flesh trailing from the gums.  
She turns and backtracks.  The cloud on the seabed is starting to settle.
"Ballard," she says in her synthetic voice. 
Nobody answers.
	Clarke reaches down through the mud, feeling blind, until she touches something warm and trembling.
	The seabed explodes in her face.
	Ballard erupts from the substrate, trailing a muddy comet's tail. Her hand rises from that sudden cloud, clasped around something glinting in the transient light.  Clarke sees the knife, twists almost too late; the blade glances off her 'skin, igniting nerves along her ribcage.  Ballard lashes out again.  This time Clarke catches the knife-hand as it shoots past, twists it, pushes.  Ballard tumbles away.
"It's me!" Clarke shouts; the vocoder turns her voice into a tinny vibrato.
Ballard rises up again, white eyes unseeing, knife still in hand.
Clarke holds up her hands.  "It's okay!  There's nothing here!  It's dead!" 
Ballard stops. She stares at Clarke.  She looks over to the squids, to the smile they illuminate.  She stiffens.
"It's some kind of whale,"  Clarke says.  "It's been dead a long time." 
	"A — a whale?"  Ballard rasps.  She begins to shake.
There's no need to feel embarrassed, Clarke almost says, but doesn't. Instead, she reaches out and touches Ballard lightly on the arm.  Is this how you do it?, she wonders.
Ballard jerks back as if scalded.
I guess not—
"Um, Jeanette—" Clarke begins.
Ballard raises a trembling hand, cutting Clarke off.  "I'm okay.  I want to g — I think we should get back now, don't you?"
"Okay," Clarke says.  But she doesn't really mean it.
She could stay out here all day.
#
Ballard is at the library again.  She turns, passing a casual hand over the brightness control as Clarke comes up behind her; the display darkens before Clarke can see what it is.  Clarke glances at the eyephones hanging from the terminal, puzzled.  If Ballard doesn't want her to see what she's reading, she could just use those.
But then she wouldn't see me coming...
"I think maybe it was a Ziphiid," Ballard's saying.  "A beaked whale.  Except it had too many teeth.  Very rare.  They don't dive this deep." 
Clarke listens, not really interested. 
"It must have died and rotted further up, and then sank."  Ballard's voice is slightly raised.  She looks almost furtively at something on the other side of the lounge.  "I wonder what the chances are of that happening."   
"What?"  
"I mean, in all the ocean, something that big just happening to drop out of the sky a few hundred meters away.  The odds of that must be pretty low."
"Yeah.  I guess so."  Clarke reaches over and brightens the display.  One half of the screen glows softly with luminous text.  The other holds the rotating image of a complex molecule. 
"What's this?" Clarke asks.
Ballard steals another glance across the lounge.   "Just an old biopsyche text the library had on file.  I was browsing through it.  Used to be an interest of mine."
Clarke looks at her. "Uh huh."  She bends over and studies the display. Some sort of technical chemistry.  The only thing she really understands is the caption beneath the graphic. 
She reads it aloud:  "True Happiness." 
"Yeah.  A tricyclic with four side chains."  Ballard points at the screen. "Whenever you're happy, really happy, that's what does it to you."
"When did they find that out?" 
"I don't know.  It's an old book."
Clarke stares at the revolving simulacrum.  It disturbs her, somehow.  It floats there over that smug stupid caption, and it says something she doesn't want to hear. 
You've been solved, it says.  You're mechanical.  Chemicals and electricity.  Everything you are, every dream, every action, it all comes down to a change of voltage somewhere, or a — what did she say — a tricyclic with four side chains— 
"It's wrong," Clarke murmurs.  Or they'd be able to fix us, when we broke down— 
"Sorry?" Ballard says.
"It's saying we're just these — soft computers.  With faces." 
Ballard shuts off the terminal. 
"That's right," she says. "And some of us may even be losing those."
The jibe registers, but it doesn't hurt.  Clarke straightens and moves towards the ladder.
"Where you going?  You going outside again?"  Ballard asks.
"The shift isn't over.  I thought I'd clean out the duct on number two."
"It's a bit late to start on that, Lenie.  The shift will be over before we're even half done."  Ballard's eyes dart away again.  This time Clarke follows the glance to the full-length mirror on the far wall.  
She sees nothing of particular interest there. 
"I'll work late." Clarke grabs the railing, swings her foot onto the top rung.
"Lenie," Ballard says, and Clarke swears she hears a tremor in that voice. She looks back, but the other woman is moving to Comm.  "Well, I'm afraid I can't go with you," she's saying.  "I'm in the middle of debugging one of the telemetry routines."
"That's fine," Clarke says.  She feels the tension starting to rise. Beebe is shrinking again.  She starts down the ladder.
"Are you sure you're okay going out alone?   Maybe you should wait until tomorrow."
"No.  I'm okay." 
"Well, remember to keep your receiver open.  I don't want you getting lost on me again—"
Clarke is in the wetroom.  She climbs into the airlock and runs through the ritual.  It no longer feels like drowning.  It feels like being born again.
#
She awakens into darkness, and the sound of weeping. 
She lies there for a few minutes, confused and uncertain.  The sobs come from all sides, soft but omnipresent in Beebe's resonant shell.  She hears nothing else except her own heartbeat.
She's afraid.  She's not sure why.  She wishes the sounds would go away.
Clarke rolls off her bunk and fumbles at the hatch.  It opens into a semi-darkened corridor; meager light escapes from the lounge at one end.  The sounds come from the other direction, from deepening darkness.  She follows them through an infestation of pipes and conduits. 
Ballard's quarters.  The hatch is open.  An emerald readout sparkles in the darkness, bestowing no detail upon the hunched figure on the pallet.
"Ballard," Clarke says softly.  She doesn't want to go in.
The shadow moves, seems to look up at her.  "Why won't you show it?" it says, its voice pleading. 
Clarke frowns in the darkness.  "Show what?" 
"You know what!  How — afraid you are!"
"Afraid?"
"Of being here, of being stuck at the bottom of this horrible dark ocean—"
"I don't understand," Clarke whispers.  Claustrophobia begins to stir in her, restless again.  
Ballard snorts, but the derision seems forced.  "Oh, you understand all right.  You think this is some sort of competition, you think if you can just keep it all inside you'll win somehow — but it isn't like that at all, Lenie, it isn't helping to keep it hidden like this, we've got to be able to trust each other down here or we're lost—"
She shifts slightly on the bunk.  Clarke's eyes, enhanced by the caps, can pick out some details now; rough edges embroider Ballard's silhouette, the folds and creases of normal clothing, unbuttoned to the waist.  She thinks of a cadaver, half-dissected, rising on the table to mourn its own mutilation.
"I don't know what you mean,"  Clarke says.
"I've tried to be friendly," Ballard says.  "I've tried to get along with you, but you're so cold, you won't even admit — I mean, you couldn't like it down here, nobody could, why can't you just admit—" 
"But I don't, I — I hate it in here.  It's like Beebe's going to — to clench around me.  And all I can do is wait for it to happen."
Ballard nods in the darkness.  "Yes, yes, I know what you mean." She seems somehow encouraged by Clarke's admission.  "And no matter how much you tell yourself—" She stops.  "You hate it in here?" 
Did I say something wrong?  Clarke wonders.
"Outside is hardly any better, you know," Ballard says.  "Outside is even worse!  There's mudslides and smokers and giant fish trying to eat you all the time, you can't possibly — but — you don't mind all that, do you?"
Somehow, her tone has turned accusing.  Clarke shrugs.
"No, you don't," Ballard is speaking slowly now.  Her voice drops to a whisper:  "You actually like it out there.  Don't you?"
Reluctantly, Clarke nods.  "Yeah.  I guess so."
	"But it's so — the rift can kill you, Lenie.  It can kill us.  A hundred different ways.  Doesn't that scare you?" 	
"I don't know.  I don't think about it much.  I guess it does, sort of."
"Then why are you so happy out there?" Ballard cries.  "It doesn't make any sense..."
I'm not exactly 'happy', Clarke thinks.  "I don't know.  It's not that weird, lots of people do dangerous things.  What about free-fallers?  What about mountain climbers?"
But Ballard doesn't answer.  Her silhouette has grown rigid on the bed. Suddenly, she reaches over and turns on the cubby light.
Lenie Clarke blinks against the sudden brightness.  Then the room dims as her eyecaps darken.
"Jesus Christ!" Ballard shouts at her.  "You sleep in that fucking costume now?"
It's something else Clarke hasn't thought about.  It just seems easier.
"All this time I've been pouring my heart out to you and you've been wearing that machine's face!  You don't even have the decency to show me your goddamned eyes!"
Clarke steps back, startled.  Ballard rises from the bed and takes a single step forward.  "To think you could actually pass for human before they gave you that suit!  Why don't you go find something to play with out in your fucking ocean!"
And slams the hatch in Clarke's face.
Lenie Clarke stares at the sealed bulkhead for a few moments.  Her face, she knows, is calm.  Her face is usually calm.  But she stands there, unmoving, until the cringing thing inside of her unfolds a little.
"Okay," she says at last, very softly.  "I guess I will."
#
Ballard is waiting for her as she emerges from the airlock.  "Lenie," she says quietly, "we have to talk.  It's important."
Clarke bends over and removes her fins.  "Go ahead."
"Not here.  In my cubby."
Clarke looks at her.
"Please." 
Clarke starts up the ladder.
"Aren't you going to take—"  Ballard stops as Clarke looks down.  "Never mind.  It's okay."
They ascend into the lounge.  Ballard takes the lead.  Clarke follows her down the corridor and into her cabin.  Ballard dogs the hatch and sits on her bunk, leaving room for Clarke.
Clarke looks around the cramped space.  Ballard has curtained over the mirrored bulkhead with a spare sheet.
Ballard pats the bed beside her.  "Come on, Lenie.  Sit down."
Reluctantly, Clarke sits.  Ballard's sudden kindness confuses her.  Ballard hasn't acted this way since...
...Since she had the upper hand.
"—might not be easy for you to hear," Ballard is saying, "but we have to get you off the rift.  They shouldn't have put you down here in the first place."
Clarke doesn't reply.
"Remember the tests they gave us?"  Ballard continues.  "They measured our tolerance to stress; confinement, prolonged isolation, chronic physical danger, that sort of thing."
Clarke nods slightly.  "So?"
"So," says Ballard, "Did you think for a moment they'd test for those qualities without knowing what sort of person would have them?  Or how they got to be that way?"
Inside, Clarke goes very still.  Outside, nothing changes.
Ballard leans forward a bit.  "Remember what you said?  About mountain climbers, and free-fallers, and why people deliberately do dangerous things?  I've been reading up, Lenie.  Ever since I got to know you I've been reading up—"
Got to know me?
"—and do you know what thrillseekers have in common?  They all say that you haven't lived until you've nearly died.  They need the danger.  It gives them a rush." 
You don't know me at all—
"Some of them are combat veterans, some were hostages for long periods, some just spent a lot of time in dead zones for one reason or another.  And a lot of the really compulsive ones—"
Nobody knows me.
"—the ones who can't be happy unless they're on the edge, all the time —  a lot of them got started early, Lenie.  When they were just children.  And you, I bet— you don't even like being touched—"
Go away.  Go away.
Ballard puts her hand on Clarke's shoulder.  "How long were you abused, Lenie?" she asks gently.  "How many years?"
Clarke shrugs off the hand and does not answer.  He didn't mean any harm. She shifts on the bunk, turning away slightly. 
"That's it, isn't it?  You don't just have a tolerance to trauma, Lenie.  You've got an addiction to it.  Don't you?"
It only takes Clarke a moment to recover.  The 'skin, the eyecaps make it easier.  She turns calmly back to Ballard.  She even smiles a little.
"Abused," she says.  "Now there's a quaint term.  Thought it died out after the witch-hunts.   You some sort of history buff, Jeanette?" 
"There's a mechanism," Ballard tells her.  "I've been reading about it. Do you know how the brain handles stress, Lenie?  It dumps all sorts of addictive stimulants into the bloodstream.  Beta-endorphins, opioids. If it happens often enough, for long enough, you get hooked.  You can't help it."
Clarke feels a sound in her throat, a jagged coughing noise a bit like tearing metal.  After a moment, she recognizes it as laughter.
"I'm not making it up!" Ballard insists.  "You can look it up yourself if you don't believe me!  Don't you know how many abused children spend their whole lives hooked on wife beaters or self-mutilation or free-fall—"
"And it makes them happy, is that it?"  Clarke says, still smiling.  "They enjoy getting raped, or punched out, or—"
"No, of course you're not happy!  But what you feel, that's probably the closest you've ever come.  So you confuse the two, you look for stress anywhere you can find it.  It's physiological addiction, Lenie.  You ask for it.  You always asked for it." 
I ask for it.  Ballard's been reading, and Ballard knows:  Life is pure electrochemistry.  No use explaining how it feels.   No use explaining that there are far worse things than being beaten up.  There are even worse things than being held down and raped by your own father.  There are the times between, when nothing happens at all.  When he leaves you alone, and you don't know for how long.  You sit across the table from him, forcing yourself to eat while your bruised insides try to knit themselves back together; and he pats you on the head and smiles at you, and you know the reprieve's already lasted too long, he's going to come for you tonight, or tomorrow, or maybe the next day.
Of course I asked for it.  How else could I get it over with? 
"Listen." Clarke shakes her head.  "I—"  But it's hard to talk, suddenly.  She knows what she wants to say; Ballard's not the only one who reads.  Ballard can't see it through a lifetime of fulfilled expectations, but there's nothing special about what happened to Lenie Clarke.  Baboons and lions kill their own young.  Male sticklebacks beat up their mates.  Even insects rape.  It's not abuse, really, it's just— biology.  
But she can't say it aloud, for some reason.  She tries, and she tries, but in the end all that comes out is a challenge that sounds almost childish:
"Don't you know anything?" 
"Sure I do, Lenie.  I know you're hooked on your own pain, and so you go out there and keep daring the rift to kill you, and eventually it will, don't you see?  That's why you shouldn't be here.  That's why we have to get you back."
Clarke stands up.  "I'm not going back."  She turns to the hatch.
Ballard reaches out toward her.  "Listen, you've got to stay and hear me out.  There's more."
Clarke looks down at her with complete indifference.  "Thanks for your concern.  But I don't have to stay.  I can leave any time I want to."
"You go out there now and you'll give everything away, they're watching us!  Haven't you figured it out yet?"  Ballard's voice is rising.  "Listen, they knew about you!  They were looking for someone like you!  They've been testing us, they don't know yet what kind of person works out better down here, so they're watching and waiting to see who cracks first!  This whole program is still experimental, can't you see that?  Everyone they've sent down — you, me, Ken Lubin and Lana Cheung, it's all part of some cold-blooded test—"
"And you're failing it," Clarke says softly.  "I see."
"They're using us, Lenie—don't go out there!"
Ballard's fingers grasp at Clarke like the suckers of an octopus.  Clarke pushes them away.  She undogs the hatch and pushes it open.  She hears Ballard rising behind her. 
"You're sick!"  Ballard screams.  Something smashes into the back of Clarke's head.  She goes sprawling out into the corridor.  One arm smacks painfully against a cluster of pipes as she falls.
She rolls to one side and raises her arms to protect herself.  But Ballard just steps over her and stalks into the lounge.
I'm not afraid, Clarke notes, getting to her feet.  She hit me, and I'm not afraid.  Isn't that odd—
From somewhere nearby, the sound of shattering glass.
Ballard's shouting in the lounge.  "The experiment's over!  Come on out, you fucking ghouls!"
Clarke follows the corridor, steps out of it.  Pieces of the lounge mirror hang like great jagged stalactites in their frame.  Splashes of glass litter the floor.
On the wall, behind the broken mirror, a fisheye lens takes in every corner of the room.
Ballard is staring into it.  "Did you hear me?  I'm not playing your stupid games any more!  I'm through performing!"
The quartzite lens stares back impassively.
So you were right, Clarke muses.  She remembers the sheet in Ballard's cubby.  You figured it out, you found the pickups in your own cubby, and Ballard, my dear friend, you didn't tell me.
How long have you known?
Ballard looks around, sees Clarke.  "You've got her fooled, all right," she snarls at the fisheye, "but she's a goddamned basket case!  She's not even sane!  Your little tests don't impress me one fucking bit!"
Clarke steps toward her.  
"Don't call me a basket case," she says, her voice absolutely level.
"That's what you are!" Ballard shouts.  "You're sick!  That's why you're down here!  They need you sick, they depend on it, and you're so far gone you can't see it!  You hide everything behind that — that mask of yours, and you sit there like some masochistic jellyfish and just take anything anyone dishes out—you ask for it—" 
That used to be true, Clarke realizes as her hands ball into fists. That's the strange thing.   Ballard begins to back away; Clarke advances, step by step.  It wasn't until I came down here that I learned that I could fight back.  That I could win.  The rift taught me that, and now Ballard has too—
"Thank you," Clarke whispers, and hits Ballard hard in the face.
Ballard goes over backwards, collides with a table.  Clarke calmly steps forward.  She catches a glimpse of herself in a glass icicle; her capped eyes seem almost luminous.
"Oh Jesus," Ballard whimpers.  "Lenie, I'm sorry."
Clarke stands over her.  "Don't be," she says.  She sees herself as some sort of exploding schematic, each piece neatly labeled.  So much anger in here, she thinks.  So much hate.  So much to take out on someone.
She looks at Ballard, cowering on the floor.
"I think," Clarke says, "I'll start with you." 
But her therapy ends before she can even get properly warmed up.  A sudden noise fills the lounge, shrill, periodic, vaguely familiar.  It takes a moment for Clarke to remember what it is.  She lowers her foot.
Over in the Communications cubby, the telephone is ringing.
#
Jeanette Ballard is going home today.
For half an hour the 'scaphe has been dropping deeper into midnight.  Now the Comm monitor shows it settling like a great bloated tadpole onto Beebe's docking assembly.  Sounds of mechanical copulation reverberate and die.  The overhead hatch drops open. 
Ballard's replacement climbs down, already mostly 'skinned, staring impenetrably from eyes without pupils.  His gloves are off; his 'skin is open up to the forearms.  Clarke sees the faint scars running along his wrists, and smiles a bit inside.
Was there another Ballard up there, waiting, she wonders, in case I had been the one who didn't work out?
Out of sight down the corridor, a hatch hisses open.  Ballard appears in shirtsleeves, one eye swollen shut, carrying a single suitcase.  She seems about to say something, but stops when she sees the newcomer.  She looks at him for a moment.  She nods briefly.  She climbs into the belly of the 'scaphe without a word.
Nobody calls down to them.  There are no salutations, no morale-boosting small talk.  Perhaps the crew have been briefed.  Perhaps they've figured it out on their own.  The docking hatch swings shut.  With a final clank, the 'scaphe disengages. 
Clarke walks across the lounge and looks into the camera.   She reaches between mirror fragments and rips its power line from the wall.
We don't need this any more, she thinks, and she knows that somewhere far away, someone agrees.
She and the newcomer appraise each other with dead white eyes. 
"I'm Lubin," he says at last.



HOUSECLEANING
So.  They say you're a beater.
Lubin stands in front of her, his duffel bag at his feet.  Slavic; dark hair, pale skin, a face planed out by an underskilled woodworker.  One thick eyebrow shading both eyes.  Not tall— a hundred and eighty centimeters, maybe— but solid.
You look like a beater.
Scars.  Not just on the wrists, on the face too.  Very faint, a webwork echo of old injuries.  Too subtle for deliberate decoration, even if Lubin's tastes run to that, but too obvious for reconstructive work; medical technology learned how to erase such telltales decades ago.  Unless— unless the injuries were really bad.
Is that it?  Did something chew your face down to the bone, a long time ago?
Lubin reaches down, picks up his bag.  His covered eyes betray nothing.
I've known beaters in my day.  You fit.  Sort of.
"Any preference which cubby I take?" he asks.  It's strange, hearing that voice coming out of a face like his.  It sounds almost pleasant.
Clarke shakes her head.  "I'm second on the right.  Take any of the others."
He steps past her.  Daggers of reflective glass protrude from the edges of the far wall; within them, Lubin's fractured image disappears into the corridor at Clarke's back.  She moves across the lounge to that jagged wall.  I should really clean this up one of these days... 
She used to like the way the mirror's worked since Ballard's adjustments.  The jigsaw reflections seem more creative, somehow.  More impressionistic.  Now, though, they're beginning to wear on her.  Maybe it's time for another change.
A piece of Ken Lubin stares at her from the wall.  Without thinking, she drives her fist into the glass.  A shower of fragments tinkles to the floor.
You could be a beater.  Just try it.  Just fucking try it.
"Oh," Lubin says, behind her.  "I—"
There's still enough mirror left to check; her face is free of any expression.  She turns to face him.
"I'm sorry if I startled you," Lubin says quietly, and withdraws.
He does seem sorry, at that.
So.  You're not a beater.  Clarke leans against the bulkhead.  At least, not my kind of beater.  She's not exactly sure how she knows.  There's some vital chemistry missing between them.  Lubin, she thinks,  is a very dangerous man.  Just not to her.  
She smiles to herself.  Beating means never having to say you're sorry.
Until it's too late, of course.

#
She's tired enough of sharing the cubby with herself.  Sharing it with someone else is something she likes even less.
Lenie Clarke lies on her bunk and scans the length of her own body.  Past her toes, another Lenie Clarke stares coolly back.  The jumbled topography of  the forward bulkhead frames her reflected face like a tabletop junkyard turned on edge.
The camera behind that mirror must see the same thing she does, but distorted around the edges.  Clarke figures on a wide-angle lens; the GA wouldn't want to leave the corners out of range.  What's the point of running an experiment if you can't keep tabs on your subject animals?
She wonders if anyone's watching her now.  Probably not; at least, nobody human.  They'll have some machine, tireless and dispassionate, something that watches with relentless attention as she works or shits or gets herself off.  It will be programmed to call flesh and blood if she does anything interesting.
Interesting.   Who defines that parameter?  Is it strictly in keeping with the nature of the experiment, or has someone programmed more personal tastes on the side?  Does anyone else get off when Lenie Clarke does?
She twists on the bed and faces the headboard bulkhead.  A spaghetti bundle of optical filaments erupts from the floor beside her pallet and crawls up the middle of the wall, disappearing into the ceiling; the seismic feeds, on their way to the communications cubby.  The air conditioning inlet sighs across her cheek, just to one side.  Behind it, a metal iris catches strips of  light sectioned by the grating, ready to sphincter shut the moment delta-p exceeds some critical number of millibars per second.  Beebe is a mansion with many rooms, each potentially self-isolating in case of emergency.	
Clarke lies back on the bunk and lets her fingers drop to the deck.  The telemetry cartridge on the floor is almost dry now, fine runnels of salt crusting its surface as the seawater evaporates.  It's a basic broad-spectrum model, studded with half a dozen senses:  seismic, temperature, flow, the usual sulfates and organics.  Sensor heads disfigure its housing like the spikes on a mace.
Which is why it's here, now.
She closes her fingers around the carrying handle, lifts the cartridge off the deck.  Heavy.  Neutrally buoyant in seawater, of course,  but 9.5 kilos in atmosphere according to the specs. Mostly pressure casing, very tough.  An active smoker at five hundred atmospheres wouldn't touch it.
Maybe it's a bit of overkill, sending it up against one lousy mirror.  Ballard started the job with her bare hands, after all.
Odd that they didn't make them shatterproof.
But convenient.
Clarke sits up, hefting the cartridge.  Her reflection looks back at her; its eyes, blank but not empty, seem somehow amused.

#

"Ms. Clarke?  You okay?"  It's Lubin.  "I heard—"
"I'm fine," she says to the sealed hatch.  There's glass all over the cubby.  One stubborn shard, half a meter long, hangs in its frame like a loose tooth.   She reaches out (mirror fragments tumble off her thighs) and taps it with one hand.  It crashes to the deck and shatters.  
"Just housecleaning," she calls.
Lubin says nothing.  She hears him move away up the corridor.
He's going to work out fine.  It's been a few days now and he's been scrupulous about keeping his distance.  There's no sexual chemistry at all, nothing to set them at each other's throats.  Whatever Ken Lubin did to Lana Cheung— whatever those two did to each other— won't be an issue here.  Lubin's tastes are too specific.
For that matter, so are Clarke's.
She stands up, head bent to avoid the metal encrustations on the ceiling.  Glass crunches under her feet.  The bulkhead behind the mirror, freshly exposed, looks oily in the fluorescent light; a ribbed gray face with only two distinguishing features.  The first is a spherical lens, smaller than a fingernail, tucked up in one corner.  Clarke pulls it from its socket, holds it between thumb and forefinger for a second.  A tiny glass eyeball.  She drops it to the glittering deck. 
There's also a name, stamped into one of the alloy ribs: Hansen Fabrication.
It's the first time she's seen see a brand name since she arrived here, except for the GA logos pressed into the shoulders of their diveskins.  That seems odd, somehow.  She checks the lightstrip running the length of the ceiling; white and featureless.  An emergency hydrox tank next to the hatch: DOT test date, pressure specs, but no manufacturer.
She doesn't know if she should attach any significance to this.
Alone, now.  Hatch sealed, surveillance ended — even her own reflection shattered beyond repair.  For the first time, Lenie Clarke feels a sense of real safety here in the station's belly.  She doesn't quite know what to do with it.
Maybe I could let my guard down a bit.  Her hands go to her face.
At first she thinks she's gone blind; the cubby seems so dark to her uncapped eyes, walls and furniture receding into mere suggestions of shadow.  She remembers turning the lights down in increments in the days since Ballard's departure, darkening this room, darkening every other corner of Beebe Station.  Lubin's been doing it too, although they never talk about it.
For the first time she wonders at their actions.  It doesn't make sense; eyecaps compensate automatically for changes in ambient light, always serve up the same optimum intensity to the retina.  Why choose to live in a darkness you don't even perceive?
She nudges the lights up a bit;  the cubby brightens.   Bright colors jar the eye against a background of gray on gray.  The hydrox tank reflects fluorescent orange; readouts wink red and blue and green; the handle on the bulkhead locker is a small exclamation of yellow.  She can't remember the last time she noticed color; eyecaps draw the faintest images from darkness, but most of the spectrum gets lost in the process.  Only now, when the lights are up, can color reassert itself.
She doesn't like it.  It seems raw and out of place down here.  Clarke puts her eyecaps back in, dims the lights to their usual minimal glow.  The bulkhead fades to a comforting wash of blue pastels.
Just as well.  Shouldn't get too careless anyway.  
In a couple of days Beebe will be crawling with a full staff.  She doesn't want to get used to exposing herself.

Rome



NEOTENOUS
It didn't look human at first.  It didn't even look alive.  It looked like a pile of dirty rags someone had thrown against the base of the Cambie pylon. Gerry Fischer wouldn't have looked twice if the skytrain hadn't hissed overhead at exactly the right moment, strobing the ground with segmented strips of light.
He stared.  Eyes, flashing in and out of shadow, stared back.
He didn't move until the train had slid away along its overhead track.  The world fell back into muddy low contrast.  The sidewalk.  The strip of kudzu4 below the track, gray and suffocating under countless drizzlings of concrete dust.  Feeble cloudbank reflections of neon and laser from Commercial.  
And this thing with the eyes, this rag-pile against the pylon.  A boy.  
A young boy.
This is what you do when you really love someone, Shadow always said.  After all, the kid could die out here.
"Are you okay?" he said at last.
The pile of rags shifted a little, and whimpered.
"It's okay.  I won't hurt you."
"I'm lost," it said, in a very strange voice.
Fischer took a step forward.  “You a ref?”  The nearest refugee strip was over a hundred kilometers away, and well guarded, but sometimes someone would get out.
The eyes swung from side to side:  no.
But then, Fischer thought, what else would he say? Maybe he’s afraid I’ll turn him in.
"Where do you live?" he asked, and listened closely to the answer:
"Orlando."
No hint of Asian or Hindian in that voice.  Back when Fischer was a kid his mom would always tell him that disasters were color-blind, but he knew better now.  The kid sounded N’Am; not a ref, then.  Which meant there would probably be people looking for him.
Which, in a way, was too—
Stop it. 
"Orlando,” he repeated aloud.  “You are lost.  Where's your mom and dad?"
"Hotel."  The rag pile detached itself from the pylon and shuffled closer.  "Vanceattle."  The words came out half-whistled, as though the kid was speaking through his sinuses.  Maybe he had one of those, those — Fischer groped for the words — cleft palates, or something.
"Vanceattle?  Which one?"
Shrug.
"Don't you have a watch?"
"Lost it."
You've got to help him, Shadow said.
"Well, um, look."  Fischer rubbed at his temples.  "I live close by.  We can call from there."
There weren't that many Vanceattles in the lower mainland.  The police wouldn't have to find out.  And even if they did, they wouldn't charge him.  Not for this.  What was he supposed to do, leave the kid for body parts?
"I'm Gerry," Fischer said.
"Kevin."
Kevin looked about nine or ten.  Old enough that he should know how to use a public terminal, anyway.  But there was something wrong with him.  He was too tall and skinny, and his limbs tangled up in themselves when he walked.  Maybe he was brain damaged.   Maybe one of those nanotech babies that went bad.  Or maybe his mother just spent too much time outdoors when she was pregnant.
Fischer led Kevin up to his two-room timeshare.  Kevin dropped onto the couch without asking.  Fischer checked the fridge:  root beer.  The boy took it with a nervous smile.  Fischer sat down beside him and put a reassuring hand on Kevin's lap. 
The expression drained from Kevin's face as though someone had pulled a plug.
Go on, Shadow said.  He's not complaining, is he?
Kevin's clothes were filthy.  Caked mud clung to his pants.  Fischer reached over and began picking it off.  "We should get you out of these clothes.  Get you cleaned up.  We can only take showers on even days here, but you could always take a sponge bath..." 
Kevin just sat there.  One hand gripped his drink, bony fingers denting the plastic; the other rested motionless on the couch.
Fischer smiled.  "It's okay.  This is what you do when you really—"
Kevin stared at the floor, trembling.
Fischer found a zipper, pulled.  Pressed, gently.  "It's okay.  It's okay.  Don't worry."
Kevin stopped shaking.  Kevin looked up.  
Kevin smiled.
"I'm not the one who should be worried here, asshole," he said in his whistling child's voice.
The jolt threw Fischer to the floor.  Suddenly he was staring at the ceiling, fingers twitching at the ends of arms that had turned, magically, into dead weights.  His whole nervous system sang like a tracery of high-tension wires embedded in flesh.  
His bladder let go.  Wet warmth spread out from his crotch.
Kevin stepped over him and looked down, all trace of awkwardness gone from his movements.  One hand still held the plastic cup.  The other held a shockprod.
Very deliberately, Kevin upended his drink.  Fischer watched the liquid snake down, almost casually, and splash across his face.  His eyes stung;  Kevin was a spindly blur in a wash of weak acid.  Fischer tried to blink, tried again, finally succeeded.
One of Kevin's legs was swinging back at the knee.
"Gerald Fischer, you are under arrest—"
It swung forward.  Pain erupted in Fischer's side.
"—for indecent assault of a minor—"
Back.  Forward.  Pain.
"—under sections 151 and 152 of the N'Am Pacific Criminal Code."
The child knelt down and glared into his face.  Up close the telltales were obvious; the depth of the eyes, the size of the pores in the skin, the plastic resilience of adult flesh soaked in androgen suppressants.
"Not to mention violation of yet another restraining order," Kevin added.
How long, Fischer wondered absently.  Neural aftershock draped the whole world in gauze.  How many months did it take to stunt back down from man to child? 
"You have the right to— ah, fuck."
And how long to reverse the reversal?   Could Kevin ever grow up again?
"You know your fucking rights better than I do."
This wasn't happening.  The police wouldn't go this far, they didn't have the money, and anyway, why?  How could anyone be willing to change themselves like that?  Just to get Gerry Fischer?  Why? 
"I suppose I should call you in,  shouldn't I?  Then again, maybe I'll just let you lie here in your own piss for a while..." 
Somehow, he got the feeling that Kevin was hurting more than he was.  It didn't make sense.
It's okay, Shadow told him softly.  It's not your fault.  They just don't understand.
Kevin was kicking him again, but Fischer could hardly feel it.  He tried to say something, anything, that would make his tormentor feel a little better, but his motor nerves were still fried.
He could still cry, though.  Different wiring.

#

It was different this time.  It started out the same, the scans and the samples and the beatings, but then they took him out of the line and cleaned him up, and put him in a side room.  Two guards sat him down at a table, across from a dumpy little man with brown moles all over his face.
"Hello, Gerry," he said, pretending not to notice Fischer's injuries.  "I'm Dr. Scanlon."
"You're a shrink."
"Actually, I'm more of a mechanic."  He smiled, a prissy little smile that said I've just been very clever but you're probably too stupid to get the joke.  Fischer decided he didn't like Scanlon much.  
Still, his type had been useful before, with all their talk about competence and criminal responsibility.  It's not so much what you did, Fischer had learned, as why you did it.  If you did things because you were evil, you were in real trouble.  If you did the same things because you were sick, though, the doctors would sometimes cover for you. Fischer had learned to be sick. 
Scanlon pulled a headband out of his breast pocket.  "I'd like to talk to you for a little while, Gerry.  Would you mind putting this on for me?"
The inside of the band was studded with sensor pads.  It felt cool across his forehead. Fischer looked around the room, but he couldn't see any monitors or readouts.
"Great."  Scanlon nodded to the guards.  He waited until they'd left before he spoke again.
"You're a strange one, Gerry Fischer.  We don't run into too many like you."
"That's not what the other doctors said."
"Oh?  What did they say?"
"They said I was typical.  They said, they said lots of the one-fifty-one's used the same rationale."
Scanlon leaned forward.  "Well you know, that's true.  It's a classic line:  'I was teaching her about her awakening sexuality, doctor.'  'It's the parents' job to instruct their children, doctor.'  'They don't like school either, but it's for their own good.'"
"I never said those things.  I don't even have kids."
"No you don't.  But the point is, pedophiles often claim to be acting in the best interests of the children.  They turn sexual abuse into an act of altruism, if you will."
"It's not abuse.  It's what you do if you really love someone."
Scanlon leaned back in his chair and studied Fischer for a few moments.
"That's what's so interesting about you, Gerry."
"What?"
"Everyone uses that line.  You're the only person I've met who might actually believe it." 

#

In the end, they said they could take care of the charges.  He knew there had to be more to it than that, of course; they'd make him volunteer for some sort of experiment, or donate some of his organs, or submit to voluntary castration first.  But the catch, when it came, wasn't any of those things.  He almost couldn't believe it.
They wanted to give him a job.
 "Think of it as community service," Scanlon said. "Restitution to all of society.  You'd be underwater most of the time, but you'd be well-equipped."
"Underwater where?"
"Channer Vent.  About forty kilometers north of the Axial Volcano, on the Juan de Fuca Rift.  Do you know where that is, Gerry?" 
"How long?"
"One year minimum.  You could extend that if you wanted to."
Fischer couldn't think of any reason why he would, but it didn't matter.  If he didn't take this deal they'd stick a governor in his head for the rest of his life.  Which might not be that long, when you thought about it.
"One year," he said.  "Underwater."
Scanlon patted his arm.  "Take your time, Gerry.  Think about it.  You don't have to decide until this afternoon."
Do it, Shadow urged.  Do it or they'll cut into you and you'll change...
But Fischer wasn't going to be rushed.  "So what do I do for one year, underwater?"
Scanlon showed him a vid.
"Geez," Fischer said.  "I can't do any of that."
"No problem." Scanlon smiled.  "You'll learn."

#
He did, too.
A lot of it happened while he was sleeping.  Every night they'd give him an injection, to help him learn, Scanlon said. Afterwards a machine beside his bed would feed him dreams.  He could never exactly remember them but something must have stuck, because every morning he'd sit at the console with his tutor — a real person, though, not a program — and all the text and diagrams she showed him would be strangely familiar.   Like he'd known it all years ago, and had just forgotten.   Now he remembered everything:  plate tectonics and subduction zones, Archimedes Principle,  the thermal conductivity of two percent hydrox.  Aldosterone. 
Alloplasty.
He remembered his left lung after they cut it out, and the technical specs on the machines they put in its place.
Afternoons, they'd attach leads to his body and saturate his striated muscles with low-amp current.  He was starting to understand what was going on, now; the term was induced isometrics, and its meaning had come to him in a dream.
A week after the operation he woke up with a fever.
"Nothing to worry about," Scanlon told him.  "That's just the last stage of your infection."
"Infection?"
"We shot you up with a retrovirus the day you came here.  Didn't you know?"
Fischer grabbed Scanlon's arm.  "Like a disease?  You—"
"It's perfectly safe, Gerry."  Scanlon smiled patiently, disentangling himself.  "In fact, you wouldn't last very long down there without it; human enzymes don't work well at high pressure.   So we loaded some extra genes into a tame virus and sent it in.  It's been rewriting you from the inside out.  Judging by your fever I'd say it's nearly finished.  You should be feeling better in a day or so."
"Rewriting?" 
"Half your enzymes come in two flavors now.  They got the genes from one of those deep-water fish.  Rattails, I think they're called."  Scanlon patted Fischer on the shoulder.  "So how does it feel to be part fish, Gerry?"
"Coryphaenoides armatus,"  Fischer said slowly.
Scanlon frowned.  "What was that?"
"Rattails."  Fischer concentrated.  "Mostly dehydrogenases, right?"
Scanlon glanced at the machine by the bed.  "I'm, um, not sure."
"That's it.  Dehydrogenases.  But they tweaked them to reduce the activation energy."  He tapped his temple.  "It's all here.  Only I haven't done the tutorial yet."
"That's great," Scanlon said; but he didn't sound like he meant it.

#
One day they put him in a tank built like a piston, five stories tall: its roof could press down like a giant hand, squeezing whatever was inside.  They sealed the hatch and flooded the tank with seawater.  
Scanlon had warned him about the change.  "We flood your trachea and your head cavities, but your lung and intestines aren't rigid so they just squeeze down. We're immunizing you against pressure, you see?  They say it's a bit like drowning, but you get used to it."  
It wasn't that bad, actually.  Fischer's guts twisted in on themselves, and his sinuses burned like hell, but he'd take that over another bout with Kevin any day.  
He floated there in the tank, seawater sliding through the tubes in his chest, and reflected on the queasy sensation of not breathing.
"They're getting some turbulence." Scanlon's voice came at him from all directions, as if the walls themselves were talking.  "From your exhaust port."
A fine trail of bubbles was trickling from Fischer's chest. His eyecaps made everything seem marvelously clear, like a hallucination. "Just a bit of—" 
Not his voice.  His words, but spoken by something else, some cheap machine that didn't know about harmonics.  One hand went automatically to the disk embedded in his throat.
"—hydrogen," he tried again. "No problem.  Pressure'll squeeze them down when I get deep enough."
"Yeah.  Still."  Other words, muffled, as Scanlon spoke to someone else.  Fischer felt something vibrate softly in his chest.  The bubbles grew larger, then smaller.  Then disappeared.
Scanlon was back.  "Better?"
"Yeah."  Fischer didn't know how he felt about this, though.  He didn't really like having a chest full of machinery.  He didn't really like having to breathe by chopping water into chunks of hydrogen and oxygen.  But he really didn't like the idea of some tech he'd never even met fiddling with his insides by remote control, reaching into his body and messing around in there without even asking.  It made him feel—
Violated, right?
Sometimes Shadow was just a bitch.  As if she hadn't been the one to put him up to it in the first place.
"We're going to kill the lights now, Gerry."
Darkness.  The water hummed with the sound of vast machinery.
After a few moments he noticed a cold blue spark winking at him from somewhere overhead.  It seemed to cast a lot more light than it should.   As he watched, the inside of the tank reappeared in hazy shades of blue-on-black.
"Photoamps working okay?" Scanlon wanted to know.
"Uh huh."
"What can you see?"
"Everything.  The inside of the tank.  The hatch.  Sort of bluish."
"Right.  Luciferin light source."
"It's not very bright,"  Fischer said.  "Everything's sort of like, dusk."
"Well, it'd be pitch black without your eyecaps."
And suddenly, it was.
"Hey."
"Don't worry, Gerry.  Everything's fine.  We just shut the light off."
He lay there in utter darkness.  Floaters wriggled at the corner of his eye.
"How are you feeling, Gerry?  Any sensation of falling?  Claustrophobia?"
He felt almost peaceful.
"Gerry?"
"No.  Nothing.  I feel—fine—"
"Pressure's at two thousand meters."
"I can't feel it."
This might not be so bad after all.  One year.  One year...
"Doctor Scanlon," he said after a while.  He was even getting used to the metallic buzz of his new voice.
"Right here."
"Why me?"
"What do you mean, Gerry?"
"I wasn't, you know, qualified.  Even after all this training I bet there's lots of people who'd be better at this than me.  Real engineers."
"It's not so much what you know," Scanlon said.  "It's what you are."
He knew what he was.  People had been telling him for as long as he could remember.  He didn't see what the fuck that had to do with anything.  "What's that, then?"
At first he thought he wasn't going to get an answer.  But Scanlon finally spoke, and when he did there was something in his voice that Fischer had never heard before.
"Pre-adapted," was what he said.



ELEVATOR BOY
The Pacific Ocean slopped two kilometers under his feet.  He had a cargo of blank-eyed psychotics sitting behind him.  And the lifter was being piloted by a large pizza with extra cheese.  Joel Kita liked it all about as much as could be expected.
At least he had been expecting it, this time.  For once the GA hadn't sprung one of their exercises in chaos theory onto his life without warning.  He'd seen it coming almost a week in advance, when they'd sprung one onto Ray Stericker instead.  Ray had been in this very cockpit, watching the pizza being installed and no doubt wondering when the term "job security" had become an oxymoron.
"I'm supposed to baby-sit it for a week," he had said then.  Joel had climbed up into the 'scaphe for the usual preflight check and found his friend waiting by the controls.  Ray had gestured up through the open hatchway to the lifter's cockpit, where a couple of techs were busy interfacing something to the controls.  "Just in case it screws up in the field.  Then I'm gone."
"Gone where?"  Joel couldn't believe it.  Ray had been on the Juan de Fuca run forever, even before the geothermal program.  He’d even been an employee, back when such things were commonplace. 
"Probably the Gorda circuit for a while.  After that, who knows?  They'll be upgrading everything before long."
Joel glanced up through the hatch.  The techs were playing with a square vanilla box, half a meter on a side and about twice as thick as Kita's wrist.  "What is the fucking thing?  Some kind of autopilot?"
"With a difference.  This takes off and lands.  And all sorts of lovely things in between."
This was not good news.  Humans had always been able to integrate three-D spatial information better than the machines that kept trying to replace them.  Not that machines couldn't recognize a tree or a building when such objects were pointed out to them, but they got real confused whenever you rotated any of those objects a few degrees.  The shapes changed, contrast and shadow shifted, and it always took way too long for any of those arsenide pretenders to update its spatial maps and recognize that yes, it's still a tree, and no, it didn't morph into something else, dummy, you just changed your point of view.
In some places that wasn't a problem.  Ocean surfaces, for example.   Or controlled-access highways where the cars had their own ID transponders.  Or even lashed to the underside of a giant squashed doughnut filled with buoyant vacuum, floating in mid-air.  These had been respected and venerable environments for autopilots since well before the turn of the century.
Take-offs and landings were a different scene altogether, though.  Too many real objects going by too fast, too many things to keep an eye on.  A few billion years of natural selection still had the edge when the fast lane got that crowded.
Until now, apparently.
"Let's get out of here." Ray dropped down onto the landing pad.  Joel followed him out to the edge of the roof.  Green tangled blankets of kudzu4 spread out around them, shrouding the roofs of surrounding buildings.  It always made Joel think post-apocalypse — weeds and ivy crawling back in from the wilderness to strangle the residue of some fallen civilization.  Except, of course, these particular weeds were supposed to save civilization.
Way out by the coast, barely visible, streamers of smoke dribbled into the sky from the refugee strip.  So much for civilization.
"It's one of those smart gels," Ray said at last.
"Smart gels?"
"Head cheese. Cultured brain cells on a slab.  The same things they've been plugging into the Net to firewall infections."
"I know what they are, Ray.  I just can't fucking believe it."
"Well, believe it.  They'll be coming for you too, give 'em enough time." 
"Yeah.  Probably."  Joel let it sink in.  "I wonder when."
Ray shrugged.  "You've got some breathing space.  All that unpredictable volcanic shit, things blowing up under you.  Nastier than flying a hoover.  Harder to replace you."
He looked back at the lifter, and the 'scaphe nestled into its underbelly.
"Won't take long, though."
Joel fished a derm out of his pocket; a tricyclic with a mild lithium chaser.  He held it out without a word.
Ray just spat.  "Thanks anyway.  I want to feel pissed for a while, you know?"

#

And now, eight days later, Ray Stericker was gone.
He'd disappeared after his last shift, just the day before.  Joel had tried to track him down, drag him out, piss him up, but he hadn't been able to find the man on site and Ray wasn't answering his watch.  So here was Joel Kita, back on the job, alone except for his cargo; four very strange people in black suits, blank white lenses covering their eyes.  They all had identical GA logos stamped onto their shoulders, tags with their surnames printed just below.  At least the surnames were different, although the difference seemed trivial; male, female, large or small, they all seemed minor variants of the same make and model.  Ah yes, the Mk-5 was always such a nice boy.  Kind of quiet, kept to himself.  Who would've thought...
Joel had seen rifters before.  He'd ferried a couple out to Beebe about a month ago, just after construction had ended.   One of them had seemed almost normal, had gone out of her way to chat and joke around as if trying to compensate for the fact that she looked like a zombie.  Joel had forgotten her name.
The other one hadn't said a word.
One of the 'scaphe's tactical screens beeped a progress report.  "Bottom's rising again," Joel called back.  "Thirty five hundred.  We're almost there."
"Thanks," one of them — Fischer, according to his shoulder tag — said.  Everyone else just sat there.
A pressure hatch separated the 'scaphe's cockpit from the passenger compartment.  If you sealed it you could use the aft chamber as an airlock, or even pressurize it for saturation dives if you didn't mind the hassle of decompression.  You could also just swing the hatch shut if you wanted a bit of privacy, if you didn't like leaving your back exposed to certain passengers.  That would be bad manners, of course. Joel tried idly to think of some socially acceptable excuse for slamming that big metal disk in their faces, but gave up after a few moments. 
Now, the dorsal hatch — the one leading up into the lifter's cockpit — that one was closed, and that felt wrong.  Usually they kept it open until just before the drop.  Ray and Joel would shoot the shit for however long the trip would take — three hours, if you were going to Channer.
Yesterday, without warning, Ray Stericker had dropped the hatch shut fifteen minutes into the flight.  He hadn't said an unnecessary word the whole time, had barely even used the intercom.  And today — well, today there wasn't anyone up there to talk to any more.
Joel looked out one of the side ports.  The skin of the lifter blocked his view just a few centimeters on the other side; metal fabric stretched across carbon-fiber ribs, a gray expanse sucked into concave squares by the hard vacuum inside.  The 'scaphe rode tucked into an oval hollow in the lifter's center.  The only port that showed anything but gray skin was the one between Joel's feet; ocean, a long way down.
Not so far down now, though.  He could hear the hisses and sighs of the lifter's ballast bags deflating overhead.  Sharper sounds, more distant, cracked through the hull as electrical arcs heated the air in a couple of trim bags.  This was still regular autopilot territory, but Ray used to do it all himself anyway.  If it weren't for the closed hatch, Joel couldn't have told the difference.
The head cheese was doing a bang-up job.
He'd actually seen it a few days ago, during a delivery to an undersea rig just out of Gray's Harbor.  Ray had hit a stud and the top of the box had slid away like white mercury, slipping back into a little groove at the edge of the casing and revealing a transparent panel underneath.
Beneath that panel, packed in clear fluid, was a ridged layer of goo, a bit too gray to be mozzarella.  Dashes of brownish glass perforated the goo in neat parallel rows.
"I'm not supposed to open it up like this," Ray had said.  "But fuck 'em.  It's not as though the blighter's photosensitive."
"So what are those little brown bits?"
"Indium tin oxide over glass. Semiconductor."
"Jesus.  And it's working right now?"
"Even as we speak."
"Jesus," Joel had said again.  And then:  "I wonder how you program something like this."
Ray had snorted at that.  "You don't.  You teach it.  Learns through positive reinforcement, like a bloody baby."
A sudden, smooth shift in momentum.  Joel pulled back to the present; the lifter was hanging stable, five meters over the waves.   Right on target.  Nothing but empty ocean on the surface, of course; Beebe's transponder was thirty meters straight down.  Shallow enough to home in on, too deep to be a navigational hazard.  Or to serve as a midwater hitching post for charter boats hunting Channer's legendary sea monsters.
The cheese printed out a word on the 'scaphe's tactical board:  Launch?
Joel's finger wavered over the OK key, then came down.  Docking latches clanked open; the lifter reeled Joel Kita and his cargo down to the water.  Sunlight squinted through viewports for a few seconds as the 'scaphe swung in its harness.  A wavetop batted at the forward port.
The world jerked once, slewed sideways, and turned green.
Joel opened the ballast tanks and looked back over his shoulder.  "Going down, folks. Your last glimpse of sunlight.  Enjoy it while you can."
"Thanks," said Fischer. 
Nobody else moved.



CRUSH
Pre-adapted. 
Even now, at the bottom of the Pacific Ocean, Fischer doesn't know what Scanlon meant by that.
He doesn't feel pre-adapted, not if that means he's supposed to be at home here.  Nobody even talked to him on the way down.  Nobody talked much to anyone else, either, but when they didn't talk to Fisher it seemed especially personal.  And one of them, Brander— it's hard to tell with the eyecaps and all, but Fischer thinks Brander keeps looking at him, like they know each other from somewhere.  Brander looks mean.
Everything's out in the open down here; pipes and cable bundles and ventilation ducts are all tacked onto the bulkheads in plain sight.  He saw it on the vids before he came down, but those somehow left the impression of a brighter place, full of light and mirrors.  The wall he's facing now, for instance; there should be a mirror there. But it's just a gray metal bulkhead with a greasy, unfinished sheen to it.
Fischer shifts his weight from one foot to the other.   At one end of the lounge Lubin leans against a library pedestal, his capped eyes pointed at them with blank disinterest.  Lubin's said only one thing to them in the five minutes they've been here:
"Clarke's still outside.  She's coming in."
Something clanks under the floor.  Water and nitrox mix, gurgling, nearby.  The sound of a hatch swinging open, movement from below.
She climbs up into the lounge, droplets beading across her shoulders.  Her diveskin paints her black below the neck, a skinny silhouette, almost sexless.  Her hood is undone; blond hair, plastered against her skull, frames a face paler than Fischer's ever seen.  Her mouth is a wide thin line.  Her eyes, capped like his own, are blank white ovals in a child's face.
She looks around at them:  Brander, Nakata, Caraco, Fischer.  They look back, waiting.  There's something in Nakata's face, Fischer thinks, something like recognition, but Lenie Clarke doesn't seem to notice.  She doesn't seem to notice any of them, really.
She shrugs.  "I'm changing the sodium on number two.  A couple of you could come along, I guess."
She doesn't seem exactly human.  There is something familiar about her, though.
What do you think, Shadow?  Do I know her?
But Shadow isn't talking.

#
There's a street where none of the buildings have windows.  The streetlamps shine down with a sick coppery light on masses of  giant clams and big ropy brownish things emerging from mucous-gray cylinders (tube worms, he remembers:  Riftia fuckinghugeous, or something).   Natural chimneys rise here and there above the invertebrate multitudes, pillars of basalt and silicon and crystallized sulfur.  Every time Fischer visits the Throat, he thinks of really bad acne.
Lenie Clarke leads them on a flight down Main Street: Fischer, Caraco, a couple of cargo squids on remote.  The generators lean up over them on both sides.  A dark curtain billows across the road directly ahead, and it sparkles.  A school of  small fish darts around the edges of the streaming cloud.
"That's the problem," Lenie buzzes.  She looks back at Fischer and Caraco.  "Mud plume.  Too big to redirect."
They've come past eight generators so far.  That leaves six up ahead, drowning in silt.  Double shift, even if they call out Lubin and Brander.
He hopes they don't have to.  Not Brander, anyway.
Lenie fins off towards the plume.  The squids whine softly behind, dragging their tools.  Fischer steels himself to follow.
"Shouldn't we check thermal?"  Caraco calls out.  "I mean, what if it's hot?"
He was wondering that himself, actually.  He's been wondering about such things ever since he overheard Caraco and Nakata comparing rumors from the Mendocino fracture.  Nakata heard it was a really old minisub, with Plexiglas ports.  Caraco heard they were thermoacrylate.  Nakata said it got wedged inside the center of the rift zone. Caraco said no, it was just cruising over the seabed and a smoker blew up under it.
They agreed on how fast the viewports melted, though.  Even the skeletons went to ash.  Which didn't make much difference anyway, since every bone in every body had already been smashed by the ambient pressure.
Caraco makes a lot of sense, in Fischer's opinion, but Lenie Clarke doesn't even answer.  She just fins off into that black sparkly cloud and disappears.  At the spot she disappears the mud glows suddenly, a phosphorescent wake.  The fish swarm towards it.
"She doesn't even care, sometimes," Fischer buzzes softly. "Like, whether she lives or dies..."
Caraco looks at him for a moment, then kicks off towards the plume.
Clarke's voice buzzes out of the cloud.  "Not much time."
Caraco dives into the roiling wall with a splash of light. A knot of fish— a couple of them are a fair size now, Fischer sees— swirl in her wake.
Go on, Shadow says.
Something moves.
He spins around.  For a moment there's only Main Street, fading in distance.
Then something big and black and...and lopsided appears from behind one of the generators.
"Jeez."  Fischer's legs move of their own volition. "They're coming!" he tries to yell.  The vocoder scales it down to a croak.
Stupid. Stupid.  They warned us, the sparkles bring in the little fish and the little fish bring in the big fish and if we don't watch it we just get in the way.
The plume is right in front of him now, a wall of sediment, a river on the bottom of the ocean.  He dives in.  Something nips lightly at his calf.
Everything goes black, with occasional sparkles.  He turns his headlight on; the flowing mud swallows the beam half a meter from his face.
But Clarke can see it, somehow:  "Turn it off."
"I can't see—"
"Good.  Maybe they won't either."
He kills the light.  In the darkness he gropes the gas billy from its sheath on his leg.
Caraco, from a distance:  "I thought they were blind..."
"Some of them."
And they've got other senses to fall back on.  Fischer runs through the list: smell, sound, pressure waves, bioelectric fields...  Nothing relies on vision down here.  It's just one of the options. 
He hopes the plume blocks more than just light.
But even as he watches, the darkness is lifting.  Black murk turns brown, then almost gray.  Faint light filters in from the floodlamps on Main Street.
It's the eyecaps, he realizes.  They're compensating.  Cool.
He still can't see very far, though.  It's like being caught in dirty fog.
"Remember."  Clarke, very close.  "They're not as tough as they look.  They probably won't do much real damage."
A sonar pistol stutters nearby.  "I'm not getting anything," Caraco buzzes.  Milky sediment swirls on all sides.  Fischer puts his arm out; it fades at the elbow.
"Oh shit."  Caraco.
"Are you—"
"Something's on my leg something's Christ it's big—"
"Lenie—" Fischer cries.
A bump from behind.  A slap on the back of his head.  A shadow, black and spiny, fades into the murk.
Hey, that wasn't so—
Something clamps onto his leg.  He looks down: jaws, teeth, a monstrous head fading away into the murk.
Oh Jeez—
He jams his billy against scaly flesh.  Something gives, like gelatin.  A soft thump.  The flesh bloats, ruptures; bubbles explode from the rip.
Something else smashes him from behind.  His chest is in a vise. He lashes out, blindly.  Mud and ash and black blood billow into his face.
He grabs blindly, twists.  There's a broken tooth in his hand, half as long as his forearm; he tightens his grip and it splinters.  He drops it, brings the billy around and jams it into the thing on his side.  Another explosion of meat and compressed CO2.
The pressure lifts from his chest.  Whatever's clamped onto his leg isn't moving.  Fischer lets himself sink, drifts down against the base of a barite chimney.
Nothing charges him.
"Everyone okay."  Lenie's vocoded monotone.  Fischer grunts yes.
"Thank God for bad nutrition," Caraco buzzes.  "We're fucked if these guys ever get enough vitamins."
Fischer reaches down,  pries the dead monster's jaws off his calf.  He wishes he had breath to catch.
Shadow?
Right here.
Was this what it was like for you?
No.  This didn't take so long.
He lies against the bottom and tries to shut his eyes.  He can't; the diveskin bonds to the surface of the eyecaps, traps the eyelids in little cul-de-sacs.  I'm sorry, Shadow.  I'm so sorry.
I know, she says.  It's okay.

#

Lenie Clarke stands naked in Medical, spraying the bruises on her leg.  No, not naked; the caps are still on her eyes.  All Fischer can see is skin.  
It's not enough.
A trickle of blood crawls down her side from just below the water intake.  She absently wipes it away and reloads the hypo.
Her breasts are small, almost adolescent, bumps.  No hips.  Her body's as pale as her face, except for the bruises and the fresh pink seams that access the implants.  She looks anorexic.
She's the first adult Fischer's ever wanted.
She looks up and sees him in the doorway.  "Strip down," she tells him, and goes back to work.
He splits his 'skin and starts to peel.  Lenie finishes with her leg and stabs an ampoule into the cut in her side.  The blood clots like magic.
"They warned us about the fish," Fischer says, "but they said they were really fragile.  They said we could just beat them off with our hands if we had to."
Lenie sprays the cut in her side with a hypo, wipes off the residue.  "You're lucky they told you that much."  She pulls her diveskin tunic off a hanger, slides into it.  "They barely mentioned the giantism when they sent us down."
"That's stupid.  They must've known."
"They say this is the only vent where the fish get this big.  That they've found, anyway."
"Why?  What's so special here?"
Lenie shrugs.
Fischer has stripped to the waist.  Lenie looks at him.  "Leggings too.  It got your calf, right?"
He shakes his head.  "That's okay."
She looks down.  His diveskin's only a couple of millimeters thick, it doesn't hide anything.  He feels his erection going soft under her gaze.
Lenie's cold white eyes track back to his face.  Fischer feels his face heating before he remembers:  she can't see his eyes.  No one can.
It's almost safe in here.
"Bruising's the biggest problem," Lenie says at last.  "They don't puncture the diveskin all that often, but the force of the bite still gets through."  Her hand is on his arm, firm and professional, probing the edges of Fischer's injury.  It hurts, but he doesn't mind.
She uncaps a tube of anabolic salve.  "Here. Rub this in."
The pain fades on contact.  His flesh goes warm and tingly where he applies the ointment.  He reaches out, a little bit scared, and touches Lenie's arm.  "Thanks."
She twists out of reach without a word, bending down to seal the 'skin on her leg.  Fischer watches the leggings slide up her body.  They seem almost alive.  They are almost alive, he remembers.  The 'skin's got these reflexes, changes its permeability and thermal conductivity in response to body temperature.  Maintains, what's the word,  homeostasis.
Now he watches it swallowing Lenie's body like some slick black amoebae but she's showing through underneath, black ice instead of white but still the most beautiful creature he's ever seen.  She's so far away.  There's someone inside telling him to watch it—
—Go away, Shadow—
—but he can't help himself, he can almost touch her, she's bent over sealing her boots and his hand caresses the air just above her shoulder, traces the outline of her curved back so close it could feel her body heat if that stupid diveskin wasn't in the way, and—
And she straightens, bumping into his hand.  Her face comes up;  something burns behind her eyecaps.  He pulls back but it's too late; her whole body's gone rigid and furious.
I just touched her.  I didn't do anything wrong I just touched her—
She takes a single step forward.   "Don't do that again," she says, her voice so flat he wonders for a second how her vocoder could work out of the water.
"I'm not—I didn't—"
"I don't care," she says.  "Don't do it again."
Something moves at the corner of his eye.  "Problem, Lenie? Need a hand?"  Brander's voice.
She shakes her head.  "No."
"Okay, then."  Brander sounds disappointed. "I'll be upstairs."
Movement again.  Sounds, receding.
"I'm sorry," Fischer says.
"Fine," Lenie says, and brushes past him into the wet room.



AUTOCLAVE

Nakata nearly bumps into her at the base of the ladder.  Clarke glares; Nakata moves aside, baring teeth in a submissive primate smile.
Brander's in the lounge, pecking at the library:  "You—?"
"I'm fine."  She isn't, but she's getting there.  This anger is nowhere near critical mass; it's just a reflex, really, a spark budded off from the main reservoir.  It decays exponentially with elapsed time.  By the time she reaches her cubby she's almost feeling sorry for Fischer.  
Not his fault.  He didn't mean any harm.
She closes the hatch behind her.  It's safe to hit something now, if she wants.  She looks around half-heartedly for a target, finally just drops onto her bunk and stares at the ceiling.
Someone raps on metal.  "Lenie?"
She rises, pushes at the hatch.
"Hey Lenie, I think I've got a bad slave channel on one of the squids.  I was wondering if you could—"
"Sure."  Clarke nods.  "Fine.  Only not right now, okay, um—"
"Judy," says Caraco, sounding slightly miffed.
"Right.  Judy."  In fact, Clarke hasn't forgotten.  But Beebe's way too crowded these days. Lately Clarke's learned to lose the occasional name.  It helps keep things comfortably distant.
Sometimes.
"Excuse me," she says, brushing past Caraco.  "I've got to get outside."

#

In a few places, the rift is almost gentle.
Usually the heat stabs up in boiling muddy pillars or jagged bolts of superheated liquid. Steam never gets a chance to form at three hundred atmospheres, but thermal distortion turns the water into a column of writhing liquid prisms, hotter than molten glass.  Not here, though.  In this one spot, nestled between lava pillows and safe from Beebe's prying ears, the heat wafts up through the mud like a soft breeze.  The underlying bedrock must be porous.
She comes here when she can, keeping to the bottom en route to foil Beebe's sonar.  The others don't know about this place yet; she'd just as soon keep it that way.  Sometimes she comes here to watch convection stir the mud into lazy curlicues.  Sometimes she splits the seals on her 'skin, basks face and arms in the thirty-degree seep.
Sometimes she just comes here to sleep.
She lies with the shifting mud at her back, staring up into blackness.  This is how you fall asleep when you can't close your eyes; you stare into the dark, and when you start seeing things you know you're dreaming.
Now she sees herself, the high priestess of a new troglodyte society.  She was the first one here, deep at peace while the others were still being cut open and reshaped by grubby Dryback hands.  She's the founding mother, the template against which other, rawer recruits trace themselves.  They come down and they see that her eyes are always capped, and they go and do likewise. 
But she knows it isn't true.  The rift is the real creative force here, a blunt hydraulic press forcing them all into shapes of its own choosing.  If the others are anything like her it's because they're all being squeezed in the same mold.
And let's not forget the GA. If Ballard was right, they made sure we weren't too different to start with.
There are all the superficial differences, of course.  A bit of racial diversity.   Token beaters, token victims, males and females equally represented...
	Clarke has to smile at that.  Count on Management to jam a bunch of sexual dysfunctionals together and then make sure the gender ratio is balanced.  Nice of them to try and see that nobody gets left out.  
Except for Ballard, of course.  
But at least they learn from their mistakes.  Dozing at three thousand meters, Lenie Clarke wonders what their next one will be.

#

Sudden, stabbing pain in the eyes.  She tries to scream; smart implants feel tongue and lips in motion, mistranslate:
"Nnnnaaaaah..."
She knows the feeling.  She's had it once or twice before.  She dives blindly on a random heading.  The pain in her head leaps from intense to unbearable.
"Aaaaaa—"
She twists back in the opposite direction.  A bit better.  She trips her headlamp, kicking as hard as she can.  The world turns from black to solid brown.  Zero viz.  Mud seething on all sides.  Somewhere close by she hears rocks splitting open.
Her headlamp catches the outcropping looming up a split second before she hits it.  The shock rocks her skull, runs down her spine like a small earthquake.  There's a different flavor of pain up there now, mingling with the searing in her eyes.  She gropes blindly around the obstacle, keeps going.  Her body feels— warm—
It takes a lot of heat to get through a diveskin, especially a class four.  Those things are built for thermal stress.
Eyecaps, on the other hand...
Black.  The world is black again, and clear.  Clarke's headlamp stabs out across open space, lays a jiggling footprint on the mud a good ten meters away.
The view's still rippling, though.
The pain seems to be fading.  She can't be sure.  So many nerves have been screaming for so long that even the echoes are torture.  She clutches her head, still kicking; the movement twists her around to face the way she came.
Her secret hideaway has exploded into a wall of mud and sulfur compounds, boiling up from the seabed.  Clarke checks her thermister; 45°C, and she's a good ten meters away.  Boiled fish skeletons spin in the thermals.  Geysers hiss further in, unseen.  
The seep must have burst through the crust in an instant; any flesh caught in that eruption would have boiled off the bone before anything as elaborate as a flight reflex could cut in.  A shudder shakes Clarke's body.  Another one.
Just luck.  Just stupid luck I was far enough away.  I could be dead now. I could be dead I could be dead I could be dead—
Nerves fire in her thorax; she doubles over.  But you can't sob without breathing.  You can't cry with your eyes pinned open.  The routines are all there, stuttering into action after years of dormancy, but the pieces they work on have all been changed.  The whole body wakes up in a straitjacket.  
—dead dead dead—
That small, remote part of her kicks in, the part she saves for these occasions.  It wonders, off in the distance, at the intensity of her reaction.  This was hardly the first time that Lenie Clarke thought she was going to die.
But this was the first time in years that it seemed to matter.



WATERBED
Taking off his diveskin is like gutting himself.
He can't believe how much he's come to depend on it, how hard it is to come out from inside.  The eyecaps are even harder.  Fischer sits on his pallet, staring at the sealed hatch while Shadow whispers it's okay, you're alone, you're safe.  Half an hour goes by before he can bring himself to believe her.
Finally, when he bares his eyes, the cubby lights are so dim he can hardly see.   He turns them up until the room is twilit.  The eyecaps sit in the palm of his hand, pale and opaque in the semidarkness, like jellied circles of eggshell.  It's strange to blink without feeling them under his eyelids.  He feels so exposed.
He has to do it, though.  It's part of the process.  That's what this is all about; opening yourself up. 
Lenie's in her cubby, just centimeters away.  If it wasn't for this bulkhead Fischer could reach right out and touch her.
This is what you do when you really love someone, Shadow said way back then.  So he does it now, to himself.  For Shadow.
Thinking about Lenie.
Sometimes he thinks Lenie's the only other real person on the whole rift.  The others are robots;  glass robot eyes, matte black robot bodies, lurching through programmed routines that do nothing but keep other, bigger machines running.  Even their names sound mechanical.  Nakata.  Caraco.
Not Lenie, though.  There's someone inside her 'skin, her eyes may be glassed-in but they're not glass.  She's real. Fischer knows he can touch her.
Of course, that's why he keeps getting into trouble.  He keeps touching.  But Lenie would be different, if only he could break through.   She's more like Shadow than all the others ever were.  Older, though.
No older than I'd be now, Shadow murmurs, and maybe that's it.
His mouth moves —I'm so sorry, Lenie— and no sound comes out.  Shadow doesn't correct him.
This is what you do, she'd said, and then she'd begun to cry.  As Fischer cries now.  As he always does, when he comes.

#

The pain wakes him, sometime later.  He's curled up on the pallet, and something's cutting into his cheek:  a little piece of broken glass.  
A mirror.
He stares at it, confused.  A silver glass shard with a dark bloody tip, like a small tooth.  There's no mirror in his cubby.
He reaches up and touches the bulkhead behind his pillow. Lenie's there, Lenie's just the other side.  But here, on this side there's a dark line, a rim of shadow he never noticed before.  His eyes follow it around the edge of the wall, a gap about half a centimeter wide.  Here and there little bits of glass are still wedged into that space.
There used to be a mirror covering this whole bulkhead.  Just like Scanlon's vids.  And it wasn't just removed, judging from the little fragments left behind.  Somebody smashed it out.
Lenie.  She went through the whole station, before the rest of them came down, and she smashed all the mirrors.  He doesn't know why he's so sure, but somehow it seems like exactly the sort of thing Lenie Clarke would do when no one was looking.
Maybe she doesn't like to see herself.  Maybe she's ashamed.
Go talk to her, Shadow says.
I can't.
Yes you can.  I'll help you.
He picks up the tunic of his 'skin.  It slithers around his body, its edges fusing together along the midline of his chest.  He steps over the sleeves and leggings still spilled across the deck, reaches down for his eyecaps.
Leave them there.
No!
Yes.
I can't, she'll see me...
That's what you want, isn't it?  Isn't it?
She doesn't even like me, she'll just—
Leave them.  I said I'll help you.
He leans against the closed hatch, eyes shut, his breathing loud and rapid in his ears.
Go on.  Go on.
The corridor outside is in deep twilight.  Fischer moves along it to Lenie's sealed hatch.  He touches it, afraid to knock.
 From behind, someone taps his shoulder.
"She's out," Brander says.  His 'skin is done right up to his neck, arms and legs completely sealed.   His capped eyes are blank and hard.  And there's the usual edge in his voice, that same familiar tone saying Just give me an excuse, asshole, just do anything...
Maybe he wants Lenie too.
Don't get him mad, Shadow says.
Fischer swallows.  "I just wanted to talk to her."
"She's out."
"Okay.  I'll...I'll try later." 
Brander reaches out, pokes Fischer's face.  His finger comes away sticky.
"You're cut," he says.
"It's nothing.  I'm okay."
"Too bad."
Fischer tries to edge past Brander to his own cubby.  The corridor pushes them together.
Brander clenches his fists.  "Don't you fucking touch me."
"I'm not, I'm just trying to— I mean..."  Fischer falls silent, glances around.  No one else anywhere. 
Deliberately, Brander relaxes.
"And for Christ's sake put your eyes back in," he says.  "Nobody wants to look in there."
He turns and walks away.

#
They say Lubin sleeps out here.  Lenie too, sometimes, but Lubin hasn't slept in his bunk since the rest of them came down. He keeps his headlight off, and he stays away from the lit part of the Throat, and nothing bothers him. Fischer heard Nakata and Caraco talking about it on the last shift.
It's starting to sound like a good idea.  The less time he spends in Beebe these days, the better.
The station is a dim faraway blotch, glowing to Fischer's left.  Brander's in there.  He goes on duty in three hours.  Fischer figures he can just stay out here until then.  He doesn't really need to go inside much.  None of them do.  There's a little desalinator piggybacked on his electrolyser in case he gets thirsty, and a bunch of flaps and valves that do things he doesn't want to think about, when he has to piss or take a dump.
He's getting a bit hungry, but he can wait.  He's fine out here as long as nothing attacks him.
Brander just won't let him alone.   Fischer doesn't know what Brander's got against him—
Oh yes you do, says Shadow.
—but he knows that look.  Brander wants him to fuck up real bad.
The others keep out of it, for the most part.  Nakata, the nervous one, just keeps out of everyone's way.  Caraco acts like she couldn't care less if he boiled alive in a smoker.  Lubin just sits there, looking at the floor and smoldering; even Brander leaves him alone. 
And Lenie.  Lenie's cold and distant as a mountaintop.  No, Fischer's not getting any help with Brander.  So when it comes to a choice between the monsters out here or the one in there, it's an easy call.
Caraco and Nakata are doing a hull check back at the station.  Their distant voices buzz distractingly along Fischer's jaw.  He shuts his receiver off and settles down behind an outcropping of basalt pillows. 
Later, he can't remember drifting off.

#

"Listen, cocksucker.  I just did two shifts end to end because you didn't show up for work when you were supposed to.  Then half another shift looking for you.  We thought you were in trouble. We assumed you were in trouble.  Don't tell me—"
Brander pushes Fischer up against the wall.
"Don't tell me," he says again, "that you weren't.  You don't want to say that."
Fischer looks around the ready room.  Nakata watches from the opposite bulkhead, jumpy as a cat.  Lubin rattles around in the equipment lockers, his back to the proceedings. Caraco racks her fins and edges past them to the ladder.
"Carac—"
Brander slams him hard against the wall.
Caraco, her foot on the bottom rung, turns and watches for a moment. A smile ghosts across her face.  "Don't look at me, Gerry my man.  This is your problem."  She climbs away overhead.
Brander's face hovers a few centimeters away.  His hood is still sealed, except for the mouth flap.  His eyes look like translucent glass balls embedded in black plastic. He tightens his grip.
"So, cocksucker?"
"I'm...sorry—" Fischer stammers.
"You're sorry."  Brander glances over his shoulder, includes Nakata in the joke.  "He's sorry."
Nakata laughs, too loudly. 
Lubin clanks in the locker, still ignoring them all.  The airlock begins cycling.
"I don't think," Brander says, raising his voice over the sudden gurgle, "that you're sorry enough."
The 'lock swings open.  Lenie Clarke steps out, fins in one hand.  Her blank eyes sweep across the room; they don't pause at Fischer.  She carries her fins to the drying rack without a word.
Brander punches Fischer in the stomach.  Fischer doubles over, gasping; his head smashes into the airlock hatch.  He can't catch his breath.  The deck scrapes his cheek.  Brander's boot is almost touching his nose.
"Hey."  Lenie's voice, distant, not particularly interested.
"Hey yourself, Lenie.  He's got it coming."
"I know."  A moment passes.  "Still."
"Judy got nailed by a viperfish, looking for him.  She could've been killed."
"Maybe."  Lenie sounds as if she's very tired. "So why isn't Judy here?"
"I'm here," Brander says.
Fischer's lung is working again.  Gulping air, he pushes himself up against the bulkhead.  Brander glares at him. Lubin's back in the room now, just off to one side.  Watching.
Lenie stands in the middle of the ready room.  She shrugs.
"What?" Brander demands.
"I don't know." She glances indifferently at Fischer.  "It's just, he...he just fucked up.  He didn't mean any har—"
She stops.  Fischer gets the sense that she's looking straight through him, through the bulkhead, right out into the abyss itself to something only she can see.  Whatever it is, she doesn't like it much.
"Ah, fuck it."  She heads for the ladder.  "None of my business anyway."
Lenie, please...
Brander turns back to Fischer as she climbs out of sight.  Fischer stares back.  Endless seconds go by.  Brander's fist hovers in mid-air.
It lashes out almost too fast to see.   Fischer reels, catches himself on a conduit.  Lights swarm across his left eye.  He blinks them away, hanging onto the bulkhead.  Everything hurts.
Brander unclenches his fist.  "Lenie's way too nice," he remarks, flexing his fingers.  "Personally, I don't care whether you meant any harm or not."



DOPPELGÄNGER

Beebe's almost as soundproof as the inside of an echo chamber.
Lenie Clarke sits on her bunk and listens to the walls.  She can't hear any actual words, but a sudden impact of flesh against metal was clear enough a few minutes ago.  Now, low voices converse out in the lounge.  Water gurgles through a pipe somewhere.
She thinks she hears something moving downstairs.
	She lays her ear against a random pipe.  Nothing.  Another; a hiss of compressed gas.  A third; the faint, tinny echo of slow footsteps, scraping across the lower deck.  After a moment a muted hum vibrates through the plumbing.
The medical scanner.
It's none of my business.  It's between them.  Brander's got his reasons, and Fischer—
He didn't mean any harm.
Fischer's nothing.  He's a pathetic, twisted asshole, nobody's problem but his own.  It's too bad he gets under Brander's skin like that, but life's not guaranteed to be fair.  No one knows that better than Lenie Clarke.  She knows what it's like.  She remembers the fists out of nowhere, the million little things you didn't even know you'd done wrong until it was too late.  Nobody helped her.  She'd managed, though.  Sex worked, sometimes, as a diversionary tactic.  Other times you just had to run.
 He didn't mean any harm.
She shakes her head.
Well I fucking didn't either!
The sound sinks in before the pain does. A dull, solid thud, like a fish hitting a floodlight.  Blood oozes from the torn skin of her knuckles, the droplets almost black to her filtered vision.  The stinging that follows is a welcome distraction.
The bulkhead, of course, is completely unmarked.
Out in the lounge, the conversation has stopped.  Clarke sits rigid on the pallet, sucking her hand.  Eventually, the voices start up again. 
Almost time to go on shift with Nakata and Brander.  Clarke looks around her cubby, hesitating.  There's something she has to do before she opens the hatch, something important, and she can't quite remember what it is.  Her eyes keep coming back to the same wall, looking for something that isn't—
The mirror.  For some reason, she wants to see what she looks like.  That's odd.  She can't remember feeling that way for — well, for a long time.  But it's no big deal.  She'll just sit here until the feeling goes away.  She doesn't have to step outside, she doesn't even have to stand up, until she feels normal again.
When in doubt, stay out of sight.

#

"Alice?"
The hatch is closed.  There's no answer.
"She's in there."  Brander stands at the end of the corridor, the lounge behind him.  "She didn't go in more than ten minutes ago."
Clarke knocks again, harder.  "Alice?  It's almost time."
Brander turns on his heel — "I'll go get our stuff together." — and steps out of sight.
Beebe's hatches do not lock, for safety reasons.  Still, Clarke hesitates.  She knows how she'd feel if someone just walked into her private space without being invited.
But she said she was up for another shift.  And I did knock...
She spins the wheel in the center of the hatch. The mimetic seal around the rim softens and retracts. Clarke pulls the hatch open, peers inside.
Alice Nakata lies twitching on her bunk, eyes closed, 'skin partially peeled.  Leads trail from insertion points on her face and wrists, drape away to a lucid dreamer on the bedside shelf.
	She goes to sleep ten minutes before her shift starts?  It doesn't make sense.   Besides, Nakata was just downstairs with the rest of them.  With Fischer.  How could anyone fall asleep after that?
Clarke steps closer, studies the telltales on the device; induced REM's cranked to maximum and the alarm's disabled.  Nakata would have been out in seconds.  Hell, at those settings she'd drift off in the middle of a gang-rape.
Lenie Clarke nods approvingly.  Nice trick.
Reluctantly, she touches the wake-up stud.  Sleep drains from Nakata's face; her expression changes abruptly.  Asian eyes flicker, open wide and dark. 
Clarke steps back, startled.  Alice Nakata has taken her eyecaps off.
	"Time to go, Alice" she says softly. "Sorry to wake you..."
She is, too.  She's never seen Nakata smile before.  It would have been nice if it could have lasted.

#

Brander's sealing a broadband sensor into its casing when Clarke drops into the lounge.  "She'll catch up with us," she tells him, and turns to the drying rack for her fins.
Directly in front of her, the Med hatch is sealed.  No sounds, human or mechanical, filter through from inside.
"Oh yeah.  He's still in there."  Brander raises his voice a fraction.  "Good fucking thing, too, while I'm around."
"He didn't m—"  Shut up!  Shut the fuck up!
"Lenie?"
She turns to see his hand dropping away.  Brander's actually a lot more touchy-feely than you'd expect, sometimes he almost forgets himself around her.
But it's okay.  He doesn't mean any harm either.
"Nothing," Clarke says, grabbing her fins.
Brander carries the sensor over to the airlock, drops it in with some other trinkets and cycles them through.  Gurgles and clunks accompany their passage into the abyss.
"Only—"
He looks at her, his face framing a question around empty eyes.
"What have you got against Fischer?" she says, nearly whispering.
You know exactly what he's got against Fischer.  It's none of your business. Stay out of it.
Brander's face hardens like setting cement.  "He's a fucking freak. He diddles little kids."
I know.  "Who says?"
"Nobody has to say.  I can see his kind coming ten klicks away."
"If you say so."  Clarke listens to her own voice.  Cool.  Distant, almost bored.  Good.
"He looks at me funny.  Hell, have you seen the way he looks at you?"  Metal clanks against metal.  "If he so much as touches me I'll fucking kill him."
"Yeah.  Well, it wouldn't take much.  He just sits there and takes whatever you dish out, you know, he's so— passive..."
Brander snorts.  "Why do you care, anyway?  He creeps you out as much as the rest of us.  I saw what happened in Medical last week."
The airlock hisses.  A green light flashes on its side
"I don't know," Lenie says. "You're right, I guess.  I know what he is."
Brander swings the 'lock open and steps inside.  Clarke holds the edge of the hatch.
"There's something else, though," she says, almost to herself.  "Something's— missing.  He doesn't fit."
"None of us fits," Brander growls.  "That's the whole fucking point."
She closes the hatch.  There's enough room for two in there — the other rifters generally drop out in pairs — but she prefers to go through alone.  It's a small thing.  Nobody comments on it.
Not his fault.  Not Brander's, not Fischer's.  Not dad's.  Not mine.
Nobody's fucking fault.
The airlock flushes beside her.



ANGEL
The seabed is glowing.  Cracks in the rock flicker comforting shades of orange, like hot coals, and he knows that's thermal; the scalding rivulets feel warm even through his  'skin, his thermister leaps around every time the current twitches. But there are places here where the rocks shine green, and others where they shine blue.  He doesn't know whether to thank biology or geochemistry.  All he knows is that it's beautiful.  It's a city from high up, at night. It's a vid of the northern lights he saw once, only sharper and brighter. It's a brush fire in emeralds.
In a way he's almost grateful to Brander.  If it weren't for Brander he'd never have come upon this place.  He'd be sitting in Beebe with the rest of them, hooked into the library or hiding in his cubby, safe and dry.
But Beebe's no refuge with Brander inside.  Beebe's a gauntlet.  So today Fischer just stayed away when his shift ended, crawled off across the ocean floor, exploring.  Now, somewhere far from the Throat, he discovers real sanctuary.
Don't fall asleep, Shadow says.  If you miss your shift again it'll just give him an excuse.
So what?  He won't find me out here.  
You can't stay outside forever.  You've got to eat sometime.
I know, I know.  Be quiet.
He's the only person to have ever seen this place.  How long has it been here?  How many millions of years has this little oasis been glowing peacefully in the night, a pocket universe all to itself?
Lenie would like it out here, Shadow says.
Yeah.
A rattail cruises into view about half a meter up, its underside a jigsaw of reflected color.  It thrashes once, suddenly; violent shivers run the length of its body.  The water around it shimmers with heat distortion. The fish spins lopsidedly, tail-down, in the wake of the little eruption.  Its body turns white in seconds, begins to fray at the edges.
Four hundred eight degrees Centigrade:  that's maximum recorded temperature for hot seeps on the Juan de Fuca rift.  Fischer thinks back for the temperature rating on diveskin copolymer.
One fifty.
He sculls up into the water column a bit, just in case. As soon as he clears bottom clutter he feels the faint, regular tapping of Beebe's sonar against his insides.
That's odd.  This far out, he shouldn't be able to feel the signal, not unless they'd really cranked it up.  And they wouldn't do that unless—
He checks the time.
Oh no.  Not again. 
By the time he makes it back to the Throat they're halfway through stripping number four.  They open a space on the line for him.  Lenie doesn't want to hear his apologies.  She doesn't want to talk to him at all.  That hurts, but Fischer can't really blame her.  Maybe he can make it up to her soon.  Maybe he can take her sightseeing.
It's not Brander's shift, thank God.  He's back at Beebe.  But Fischer's getting hungry again.

#
Maybe he's in his cubby.  Maybe I can just eat and go to bed.  Maybe—  
He's sitting right there, all alone in the lounge, glaring up from his meal as soon as Fischer climbs into the room.
Don't get him mad.
Too late. He's always mad.
"I— thought we should clear some things up," he tries.
"Fuck off."
Fischer reaches the galley table, pulls out a chair. 
"Don't bother," Brander says.
"Look, this place is small enough as it is.  We've got to at least try to get along, you know?  I mean, that's assault.  It's illegal."
"So arrest me."
"Maybe you're not really mad at me at all," Fischer stops for a moment, surprised.  Maybe that's it. "Maybe you've mixed me up with someone—"
Brander stands up.
Fischer pushes on:  "Maybe someone else did something to you, once, and—"
Brander comes around the table, very deliberately.
"I haven't got you mixed up with anybody.  I know exactly what you are."
"No, you don't, we never even saw each other until a couple of weeks ago!"  Of course that's it.  It's not me at all, it's someone else!  "Whatever happened to you—"
"Is none of your fucking business, and if you say one more word I'll fucking kill you."
Let's just go, Shadow pleads.  Let's leave, this is only making things worse.
But Fisher stands his ground.  Suddenly everything seems so clear.  "It wasn't me," he says quietly. "What happened— I'm sorry.  But it wasn't me, you know it wasn't."
For a moment he thinks he might actually be getting through.  Brander's face untwists a little, the knots of flesh and eyebrow unkinking just a bit around those featureless white eyes, and Fischer can almost see that face wearing something other than rage.
But then he feels something moving, it's his own arm reaching out  Shadow no you'll ruin everything but Shadow's not listening, she's crooning Don't get him mad, don't get him mad don't get him mad—
This is what you do.
The growl starts low in Brander's throat, rising, like a distant wave pushed higher and higher out of the sea as it rushes shoreward.
"...don't you Fucking TOUCH ME!"
And nothing goes dead fast enough.

#

It stings at first. Then he feels clotted blood break around his eyelid, sees a fuzzy line of red light.  He tries to bring his hand to his face.  It hurts.
Something cold and wet, soothing.  More clots come away.
"Nnnnnn..."
Someone is poking at his eyes.  He tries to struggle, but all he can do is move his head feebly from side to side.  That hurts even more.
"Don't move."
Lenie's voice.
"Your right eyecap's damaged.  It could be gouging your cornea."
He relents. Lenie's fingers push between lids that feel as puffy as pillows.  There's a sudden pressure on his eyeball, a tug of suction.  A slurping sound, and the feel of ragged edges dragged across his pupil.
The world goes dark.  "Hang on," Lenie says.  "I'll turn up the lights."
There's still a reddish tinge to everything, but at least he can see.
He's in his cubby.  Lenie Clarke leans over him, a bit of glistening wet membrane in one hand.
"You were lucky.  He'd have ripped your costochondrals if your implants hadn't been packed in behind them."  She drops the ruined cap out of sight, picks up a cartridge of liquid skin. "As it is, he only broke a couple of ribs.  Lots of bruises.  Mild concussion, maybe, but you'll have to go to Medical to be sure.  Oh, and I'm pretty sure he broke your cheekbone too."
She sounds as if she’s reading a grocery list.
“Why not—”  Warm salt floods his mouth. His tongue does some careful exploring; his teeth are still intact, at least. “—in Medical, now?”
“It would have been a bitch getting you down the ladder.  Brander wasn’t going to help.  Everyone else is outside.”  She sprays foam across his bicep.  It pulls his skin as it dries.
“Not that they’d be any help,” she adds.
“Thanks...”
“I didn’t do anything.  Just dragged you in here, basically.”
He wants desperately to touch her.
“What is it with you, Fischer?” she asks after a while.  "Why don't you ever fight back?"
"Wouldn’t work."
"Are you kidding?  You know how big you are?  You could take Brander apart if you just stood up to him."
Shadow says it only makes things worse.  You fight back, it only gets them madder.
"Shadow?"  Lenie says.
"What?"
"You said—"
“Didn’t say anything...” 
She watches him for a few moments.
"Okay," she says at last.  She stands up.  “I'll call up and send for a replacement."
“No.  That’s okay.”
“You’re injured, Fischer."
Medical tutorials whisper inside his head.  “We've got stuff downstairs."
"You still wouldn't be able to work for a week.  More than twice that before you'd be fully healed."
"They planned for accidents.   When they set up the schedules."
"And how are you going to keep clear of Brander until then?"
"I'll stay outside more," he says.  "Please, Lenie."
She shakes her head.  "You're crazy, Fischer."  She turns to the hatch, undogs it.  "None of my business, of course.  I just don't think—"
Turns back.
“Do you like it down here?” she asks.
“What?”
“Do you get off, being down here?”
It should be a stupid question.  Especially now.  Somehow it isn’t.
“Sort of,” he says at last, realizing it for the first time.
She nods, blinking over white space.  “Dopamine rush.”
“Dopa—?”
“They say we get hooked on it.  Being down here.  Being— scared, I guess.”  She smiles faintly.  “That’s the rumor, anyway.”
Fischer thinks about that.  “Not so much I get off on it.  More like, just used to it.  You know?”
“Yeah.”  She turns and pushes the hatch open.  “For sure.”

#

There's this praying mantis a meter long, all black with chrome trim, hanging upside-down from the ceiling of the medical cubby.  It's been sleeping up there ever since Fischer first arrived.  Now it hovers over his face, jointed arms clicking and dipping like crazy articulated chopsticks.  Every now and then one of its feelers winks red light, and Fischer can smell the scent of his own flesh cauterizing.  It kind of bothers him.  What's even worse is, he can't move his head.  The neuroinduction field in the Med table has got him paralyzed from the neck up.  He keeps wondering what would happen if the focus slipped, if that damping energy ended up pointing at his lungs.  At his heart.
The mantis stops in midmotion, its antennae quivering.  It keeps completely still for a few seconds.  "Hello, er— Gerry, isn't it?" it says at last.  "I'm Dr. Troyka."
It sounds like a woman.
"How are we doing here?"  Fischer tries to answer, but his head and neck are still just so much dead meat.  "No, don't try to answer," the mantis says, "Rhetorical question.  I'm checking your readouts now."
Fischer remembers:  the medical equipment can't always do everything on its own.  Sometimes, when things get too complicated, it calls up the line to a human backup.
"Wow," says the mantis.  "What happened to you?  No, don't answer that either.  I don't want to know."  An accessory arm springs into sight and passes back and forth across Fischer's line of sight.  "I'm going to override the damping field for a moment.  It might hurt a bit.  Try not to move when that happens, except to answer my questions."
Pain floods across Fischer's face.  It's not too bad.  Familiar, even.  His eyelids feel scratchy, and his tongue is dry.  He tries blinking; it works.  He closes his mouth, rubs his tongue against swollen cheeks.  Better.
"I don't suppose you want to come back up?" Dr. Troyka asks, hundreds of kilometers away.  "You know these injuries are bad enough to warrant a recall."
Fischer shakes his head.  "That's okay.  I can stay here."
"Uh huh."  The mantis doesn't sound surprised.  "I've been hearing that a fair bit lately.  Okay, I'm going to wire your cheekbone back together, and I'll be planting a little battery under your skin.  Just below the right eye.  It'll basically kick your bone cells into overdrive, speed up the healing process.  It's just a couple of millimeters across, you'll feel like you've got sort of a hard pimple.  It may itch, but try not to pick at it.  When you're healed up you can just squeeze it out like a zit.  Okay?"
"Okay."
"All right, Gerry.  I'm going to turn the field back on and get to work."  The mantis whirrs in anticipation.
Fischer holds up a hand. "Wait."
"What is it, Gerry?"
"What...what time is it, up there?" he asks.
"It's oh five ten.  Pacific daylight.  Why?"
"It's early."
"Sure is."
"I guess I got you up," Fischer says.  "Sorry."
"Nonsense."  Digits on the end of mechanical arms wiggle absently.  "I've been up for hours.  Graveyard shift."
"Graveyard?"
"We're on duty around the clock, Gerry.  There's a lot of geothermal stations out there, you know.  You— you keep us pretty busy, as a rule."
"Oh," Fischer says.  "Sorry."
"Forget it.  It's my job."  There's a humming, somewhere in the back of his head; for a moment Fischer can feel the muscles of his face going slack.  Then everything goes numb, and the mantis swoops down him like a predator.

#
	He knows better than to open up outside.
It doesn't kill you,  not right away.  But seawater's a lot saltier than blood; let it inside and osmosis sucks the water from the epithelial cells, shrivels them down to viscous little blobs. Rifter kidneys are modified to speed up water reclamation when that happens, but it's not a long-term solution and it costs.  Organs wears out faster, urine turns to oil.  It's best to just keep sealed up.  Your insides soak in seawater too long, they sort of corrode, implants or no implants.
But that's another one of Fischer's problems.  He never takes the long view.
The face seal is a single macromolecule fifty centimeters long.  It  wraps back and forth along the line of the jaw like the two sides of a zipper, with hydrophobic side-chains for teeth.  A little blade on the index of Fischer's left glove can split them apart.  He runs it along the seal and the 'skin opens neatly around his mouth.
He doesn't feel much of  anything at first.  He was half-expecting the ocean to charge up his nose and burn his sinuses, but of course all his body cavities are already packed with isotonic saline.  The only immediate change is that his face gets cold, numbing the chronic ache of  torn flesh a bit.  Deeper pain pulses under one eye, where Dr. Troyka's wires hold the bones of his face together; microelectricity tingles along those lines, press-gangs bonebuilding osteoblasts into high gear. 
	After a couple of moments he tries to gargle; that doesn't work, so he settles for gaping like a fish and wriggling his tongue around.  That does it.  He gets his first taste of raw ocean, coarse and saltier than the stuff that pumps him up inside.
On the seabed in front of him, a swarm of blind shrimp feeds in the current from a nearby vent.  Fischer can see right through them.  They're like little chunks of glass with blobs of organs jiggling around inside.
It must be fourteen hours since he's eaten, but there's no fucking way he's going back to Beebe with Brander still inside.  The last time he tried, Brander was actually standing guard in the lounge, waiting for him.
What the hell.  It's just like krill.  People eat this stuff all the time.
They have a strange taste.  Fischer's mouth is going numb from the cold, but there's still a faint sense of rotten eggs, dilute and barely detectable.  Not bad other than that, though.  Better than Brander by a long shot.
When the convulsions hit fifteen minutes later, he's not so sure.

#

"You look like shit," Lenie says.
Fischer hangs onto the railing, looks around the lounge. "Where—"
"At the Throat.  On shift with Lubin and Caraco."
He makes it to the couch.
"Haven't seen you for a while," Lenie remarks.  "How's your face doing?"
Fischer squints at her through a haze of nausea.  Lenie Clarke is actually making small talk.  She's never done that before. He's still trying to figure out why when his stomach clamps down again and he pitches onto the floor.  By now nothing comes up but a few dribbles of sour fluid.
His eyes trace the pipes tangling along the ceiling. After a while Lenie's face blocks the view, looking down from a great height.
"What's wrong?"  She seems to be asking out of idle curiosity, no more.
"Ate some shrimp," he says, and retches again.
"You ate— from outside?"  She bends down and pulls him up.  His arms drag along behind on the deck.  Something hard bumps his head; the railing around the downstairs ladder.
"Fuck,"  Lenie says.
He's on the floor again, alone. Receding footsteps.  Dizziness.  Something presses against his neck, pricks him with a soft hiss.
His head clears almost instantly.
Lenie's leaning in, closer than she's ever been.  She's even touching him, she's got one hand on his shoulder.  He stares down at that hand, feeling a stupid sort of wonder, but then she pulls it away. 
She's holding a hypo.  Fischer's stomach begins to settle.
"Why," she says softly, "would you do a stupid thing like that?"
"I was hungry."
"So what's wrong with the dispenser?"
He doesn't answer.
"Oh," Lenie says.  "Right."
She stands up and snaps the spent cartridge out of the hypo.  "This can't go on, Fischer.  You know that."
"He hasn't got me in two weeks."
"He hasn't seen you in two weeks.  You only come in when he's on shift.  And you're missing your own shifts more and more.  Doesn't make you too popular with the rest of us."  She cocks her head as Beebe creaks around them.  "Why don't you just call up and get them to take you home?"
Because I do things to children, and if I leave here they'll cut me open and change me into something else... 
Because there are things outside that almost make it worthwhile...
Because of you...
He doesn't know if she'd understand any of those reasons.  He decides not to risk it.
"Maybe you could talk to him," he manages.
Lenie sighs.  "He wouldn't listen."
"Maybe if you tried, at least—"
Her face hardens.  "I have tried.  I—"
She catches herself.
"I can't get involved," she whispers.  "It's none of my business."
Fischer closes his eyes.  He feels as if he's going to cry.  "He just doesn't let up.  He really hates me."
"It's not you.  You're just— filling in." 
"Why did they put us together?  It doesn't make sense!"
"Sure it does.  Statistically."
Fischer opens his eyes.  "What?"
Lenie's pulling one hand down across her face.  She seems very tired.
"We're not people here, Fischer.  We're a cloud of data points.  Doesn't matter what happens to you or me or Brander, just as long as the mean stays where it's supposed to and the standard deviation doesn't get too big."
Tell her, Shadow says.
"Lenie—"
"Anyway."  Lenie shrugs the mood away.  "You're crazy to eat anything that near a rift zone.  Didn't you learn about hydrogen sulfide?"
He nods.  "Basic training.  The vents spit it out."
"And it builds up in the benthos.  They're toxic.  Which I guess you know now anyway."
She starts down the ladder, stops on the second rung.
"If you really want to go native, try feeding further from the rift.  Or go for the fish."
"The fish?"
"They move around more.  Don't spend all their time soaking in the hot springs.  Maybe they're safe."
"The fish," he says again.  He hadn't thought of that.
"I said maybe."

#

Shadow I'm so sorry...
Shush.  Just look at all the pretty lights.
So he looks.  He knows this place.  He's on the bottom of the Pacific Ocean.  He's back in fairyland.  He thinks he comes here a lot now, watches the lights and bubbles, listens to the deep rocks grinding against each other.
Maybe he'll stay this time, watch the whole thing working, but then he remembers he's supposed to be somewhere else.  He waits, but nothing specific comes to him.  Just a feeling that he should be doing something somewhere else.  Soon.
It's getting harder to stay here anyway.  There's a vague pain hanging around his upper body somewhere, fading in and out. After a while he realizes what it is.  His face hurts.   
Maybe this beautiful light is hurting his eyes. 
That can't be right.  His caps should take care of all that.  Maybe they're not working. He seems to remember something that happened to his eyes a while back, but it doesn't really matter.  He can always just leave.  Suddenly, wonderfully, all of his problems have easy answers.
If the light hurts, all he has to do is stay in the dark.



FERAL
"Hey," Caraco buzzes as they come around the corner.  "Number four."
Clarke looks.  Four's fifteen meters away and the water's a bit murky this shift.  Still, she can see something big and dark sticking to the intake vent.  Its shadow twitches down along the casing like an absurdly stretched black spider.
Clarke fins forward a few meters, Caraco at her side.  The two women exchange looks.
Fischer, hanging upside down against the mesh.  It's been four days since anyone's seen him.
Clarke gently sets down her carry bag; Caraco follows her lead.  Two or three kicks bring them to within five meters of the intake.  Machinery hums omnipresently, makes a sound deep enough to feel.
He's facing away from them, drifting from side to side, tugged by the gentle suction of the intake vent.  The vent's grillwork is fuzzy with rooted growing things; small clams, tube worms, shadow crabs.  Fischer pulls squirming clumps from the intake, leaves them to drift or to fall to the street below.  He's cleaned maybe two meters square so far.
It's nice to see he still takes some duties seriously.
"Hey.  Fischer," Caraco says.
He spins around as if shot.  His forearm flails toward Clarke's face; she raises her own just in time.  In the next instant he's bowled past her.   She kicks, steadies herself.  Fischer's heading for the darkness without looking back.
"Fischer," Clarke calls out. "Stop.  It's okay."
He stops kicking for a moment, looks back over his shoulder.
"It's me," she buzzes.  "And Judy.  We won't hurt you."
Barely visible now, he rotates to a stop and turns to face them.  Clarke risks a wave.
"Come on, Fischer.  Give us a hand."
Caraco comes up behind her.  "Lenie, what are you doing?"  She's turned her vocoder down to a hiss.  "He's too far gone, he's—"
Clarke cranks her own vocoder down.  "Shut up, Judy."  Up again.  "What do you say, Fischer?  Earn your pay."
He's coming back into the light, hesitantly, like a wild animal lured by the promise of food.  Closer, Clarke can see the line of his jaw moving up and down under his hood.  The motions are jerky, erratic, as though he's learning them for the first time.
Finally a noise comes out.  "Oh— kay—"
Caraco goes back and retrieves their gear.  Clarke offers a scraper to Fischer.  After a moment, he takes it, clumsily, and follows them to number four.
"Jussst like,"  Fischer buzzes.  "Old. T— times."
Caraco looks at Clarke.  Clarke says nothing.

#

Near the end of the shift she looks around.  "Fischer?"
Caraco pokes her head out from an access tunnel.  "He's gone?"
"When did you see him last?"
Caraco's vocoder ticks a couple of times; the machinery always misinterprets hmmm.  "Half hour ago, maybe."
Clarke puts her own vocoder on high. "Hey Fischer!  You still around?"
No answer.
"Fischer, we're heading back in a bit.  If you want to come along..."
Caraco just shakes her head.



SHADOW	
It's a nightmare. 
There's light everywhere, blinding, painful.  He can barely move.  Everything has such hard edges, and everywhere he looks the boundaries are too sharp. Sounds are like that too, clanks and shouts, every noise an exclamation of pain.  He barely knows where he is.  He doesn't know why he's there. 
He's drowning.
"UNNNNNSEEEEELLLLLHHHHHIZZZZZMMMMOOUUUUUTH..."
The tubes in his chest suck at emptiness.  The rest of his insides strain to inflate, but there's nothing there to fill them. He thrashes, panicky.  Something gives with a snap.  Sudden pain resonates in some faraway limb, floods the rest of his body a moment later.  He tries to scream, but there's nothing inside to push out.
"HHIZZMMMOUTHFORRRKKRRIISSAAAAAKHEEEZSSUFFUKKATE—"
Someone pulls part of his face off.  His insides fill with a rush; not the cold saline he's used to, but it helps.  The burning in his chest eases.
"BIGGFFUKKINNGGMMISSTTAAKE—"
Pressure, painful and uneven.  Things are holding him down, holding him up, banging into him.  The noise is tinny, deafening. He remembers a sound—
—gravity—
—that applies somehow, but he doesn't know what it means.  And then everything's spinning, and everything's familiar and horrible except for one thing, one glimpse of a face that calms him somehow—
Shadow?
—and the weight's gone, the pressure's gone, icewater calms his insides as he spirals back with her, outside again, where she used to be years ago—
She's showing him how to do it.  She creeps into his room after the shouting stops, she crawls under the covers with him and she starts stroking his penis.
"Dad says this is what you do when you really love somebody," she whispers.  And that scares him because they don't even like each other, he just wants her to go away and leave them all alone.
"Go away.  I hate you," he says, but he’s too afraid to move.
"That's okay, then you don't have to do it for me."  She’s trying to laugh, trying to pretend he was just kidding.
And then, still stroking:  "Why are you always so mean to me?”
"I'm not mean."
"Are too."
"You're not supposed to be here."
"Can't we just be friends?"  She rubs up against him.  "I can do this whenever you want—"
	"Go away.  You can’t stay here."
"I can, maybe.  If it works out, they said.  But we have to like each other or they could send me back—”
"Good."
She's crying now, she's rubbing against him so hard the bed shakes, "Please can't you like me please I'll do anything I'll even—"
But he never finds out what she'll even do because that's when the door slams open and whatever happens after that, Gerry Fischer can't remember.
Shadow, I'm so sorry...
But she's back with him now, in the cold and the dark where it's safe.  Somehow.  Beebe's a dim gray glow in the distance.  She floats against that backdrop like a black cardboard cutout.  
"Shadow..."  Not his voice.
"No."  Not hers.  "Lenie."
"Lenie..."
Twin crescents, thin as fingernails, reflect from her eyes.  Even in two dimensions she's beautiful.
Mangled words buzz from her throat:  "You know who I am?  You can understand me?"
He nods, then wonders if she can see it.  "Yeah."
"You don't— lately you're sort of gone, Fischer.  Like you've forgotten how to be human."
He tries to laugh, but the vocoder can't handle it.  "It comes and goes, I think.  I'm...lucid now, anyway.  That's the word, isn't it?"
"You shouldn't have come back inside."  Machinery strips any feeling from her words.  "He says he'll kill you.  Maybe you should just stay out of his way."
"Okay," he says, and thinks it actually might be.
"I can bring food out, I guess.  They don't care about that."
"That's okay.  I can — go fishing."
"I'll call for a 'scaphe.  It can pick you up out here."
"No.  I can swim back up myself if I want to.  Not far."
"Then I'll tell them to send someone."
"No."
A pause.  "You can't swim all the way back to the mainland."
"I'll stay down here...a while..."
A tremor growls softly along the seabed.
"You sure?" Lenie says.
"Yeah."  His arm hurts.  He doesn't know why.
She turns slightly.  The dim reflections vanish from her eyes for a long moment.
"I'm sorry, Gerry."
"Okay."
Lenie's silhouette twists around and faces back towards Beebe.  "I should get going."  
She doesn't leave.   She doesn't say anything for almost a minute.
Then:  "Who's Shadow?"
More silence. 
"She's a...friend.  When I was young."
"She means a lot to you."  Not a question.  "Do you want me to send her a message?"
"She's dead," Fischer says, marveling that he's really known it all along.
"Oh."
"Didn't mean to," he says.  "But she had her own mom and dad, you know, why did she need mine?  She went back where she belonged.  That's all." 
"Where she belonged," Lenie buzzes, almost too softly to hear.
"Not my fault," he says.  It's hard to talk.  It didn't used to be this hard.
Someone's touching him.  Lenie.  Her hand is on his arm, and he knows it's impossible but he can feel the warmth of her body through his 'skin.
"Gerry."
"Yes?"
"Why wasn't she with her own family?"
"She said they hurt her.  She always said that.  That's how she got in.  She used it, it always worked..."
Not always, Shadow reminds him.
"And then she went back,"  Lenie murmurs.
"I didn't mean to." 
A sound comes out of Lenie's vocoder, and he has no idea what it is.  "Brander's right, isn't he.  About you and kids."
Somehow, he knows she's not accusing him.  She's just checking.
"That's what you— do," he tells her.  "When you really love someone."
"Oh, Gerry.  You're so completely fucked up."
A string of clicks taps faintly on the machinery in his chest.
"They're looking for me," she says.
"Okay."
"Be careful, okay?"
"You could stay.  Here."  
Her silence answers him.
"Maybe I'll come out and visit sometimes," she buzzes at last.  She rises up into the water, turns away.
"Bye," Shadow says.  It's the first time she's spoken aloud since she came inside, but Fischer doesn't think Lenie notices the difference.
And then she's gone, for now.
But she comes out here all the time.  Alone, sometimes.  He knows it isn't over.  And when she goes back and forth with the others, doing all the things he used to do, he'll be there, off where no one can see.   Checking up.  Making sure she's okay.
Like her own guardian angel.  Right, Shadow?
A couple of fish flicker dimly in the distance.
Shadow...?

Ballet


DANCER
A week later Fischer's replacement comes down on the 'scaphe.  Nobody stands watch in Communications any more; machines don't care if they have an audience.  Sudden clanking reverberates through Beebe Station and Clarke stands alone in the lounge, waiting for the ceiling to open up. Compressed nitrox hisses overhead, blowing seawater back to the abyss.  
The hatch drops open.  Green incandescence spills into the room.  He climbs down the ladder, diveskin sealed, only his face exposed.  His eyes, already capped, are featureless glass balls.  But they are not as dead as they should be, somehow.  Something stares through those blank lenses, and it almost shines.  His blind eyes scan the compartment like radar dishes.  They lock onto hers: "You're Lenie Clarke?"  The voice is too loud, too normal.  We talk in whispers here, Clarke realizes.
They are not alone now.  Lubin, Brander, Caraco have appeared at the edges of her vision, drifting into the room like indifferent wraiths.  They take up positions around the edge of the lounge, waiting.  Fischer's replacement doesn't seem to notice them.  "I'm Acton," he tells Clarke.  "And I bring gifts from the overworld.  Behold!"  He extends his clenched fist, opens it palm up.  Clarke sees five metal cylinders there, each no more than two centimeters long.  Acton turns slowly, theatrically, showing his trinkets to the other  Rifters.  "One for each of you," he says.  "They go into your chest, right  next to the seawater intake." 
Overhead, the docking hatch swings shut.  From behind it a postcoital tattoo, metal on metal, heralds the shuttle's escape to the surface.  They wait there for a few moments: Rifters, newcomer, five new gadgets to dilute their humanity a little further.  Finally, Clarke reaches out to touch one. "What do they do?" she says, her voice neutral. 
Acton snaps his fingers shut, stares about the lounge with eyeless intensity.  "Why, Ms. Clarke," he replies, "They tell us when we're dead."

#

In Communications, Acton spills his trinkets onto a control console. Clarke stands behind him, filling the cubby.  Caraco and Brander look in through the hatchway.
Lubin has disappeared.
"The program's only four months old,"  Acton says, "and it's lost two people at Piccard, one each at Cousteau and Link, and Fischer makes five.  Not the kind of record you want to trumpet to the world, eh?"
Nobody says anything.  Clarke and Brander stand impassive; Caraco shifts on her feet.  Acton sweeps his blank shiny eyes over them all.  "Christ but you're a lively lot.  You sure Fischer's the only one down here who cashed in?"
"These things are supposed to save our lives?"  Clarke asks.
"Nah.  They don't care that much about us.  These just help you find the bodies."
He turns to the console, plays it with practiced fingers.  The topographic display flashes to life on the main screen.  "Mmmm."  Acton traces along the luminous contours with one finger.  "So this is Beebe here in the center, and this must be the rift proper—Jesus, there's a lot of geography out here."  He points at a cluster of hard green rectangles halfway to the edge of the screen.  "These are the generators?"
Clarke nods.
Acton picks up one of the little cylinders.  "They say they've already sent down the software for these things."  Silence.  "Well, I guess we'll find out, won't we?"  He fingers the object in his hand, presses one end of it.
Beebe Station screams aloud.
Clarke jerks back at the sound; her head cracks painfully against an overhead pipe.  The station continues to howl, wordless and despairing.
Acton touches a control; the scream stops as if guillotined.
Clarke glances at the others, shaken.  They appear unmoved.  Of course.  For the first time she wonders what their eyes would show, naked.
"Well," Acton says, "we know the audio alarm works.  But you get a visual signal too."  He points at the screen: dead center, within the phosphor icon that is Beebe, a crimson dot pulses like a heart under glass.
"It keys on myoelectricity in the chest," he explains.  "Goes off automatically if your heart stops."
Behind her, Clarke feels Brander turning for the hatchway.
"Maybe my etiquette is out of date—" Acton says.  
His voice is suddenly very quiet.  Nobody else seems to notice.
"—but I've always thought it was—rude—to walk away when someone's talking to you."
There's no obvious threat in the words.  Acton's tone seems pleasant enough.  It doesn't matter.  In an instant Clarke sees all the signs again; the reasoned words, the deadened voice, the sudden slight tension of a body rising to critical mass.  Something familiar is growing behind Acton's eyecaps.
"Brander," she says quietly, "why don't you hang around and hear the man out?" 
Behind her, the sounds of motion stop.
Before her, Acton relaxes ever so slightly.
Within her, something deeper than the Rift stirs in its sleep. 
"They're a snap to install," Acton says.  "It takes about five minutes.  GA says deadman switches are standard issue from now on."
 I know you, she thinks.  I don't remember but I'm sure I've seen you before somewhere...
A tiny knot forms in her stomach.  Acton smiles at her, as though sending some secret greeting.

#
Acton is about to be baptized.  Clarke is looking forward  to it. 
They stand together in the airlock, their diveskins clinging like shadows.  The deadman switch, newly installed, itches in Clarke's chest.  She  remembers the first time she dropped into the ocean this way, remembers the person who held her hand through that drowning ordeal. 
That person is gone now.  The deep sea broke her and spat her out.  Clarke wonders if it will do the same to Acton.
She floods the airlock.
By now the feeling is almost sensual; her insides folding flat, the ocean rushing into her, cold and unstoppable like a lover.  At 4°C the Pacific slides through the plumbing in her chest, anesthetizing the parts of her that can still feel.  The water rises over her head; her eyecaps show her the submerged walls of the lock with crystal precision.  
It's not like that with Acton.  He's trying to fall in on himself; he only falls into Clarke.  She senses his panic, watches him convulse, sees his knees buckle in a space far too narrow to permit collapse. 
He needs more room, she thinks, smiling to herself, and opens the outer hatch.  They drop.
She glides down and out, arcing away from under Beebe's oppressive bulk.  She leaves the floodlit circle behind, skims into the welcoming darkness with her headlight doused.  She feels the presence of the seabed a couple of meters beneath her.  She's free again.
After a few moments she remembers Acton.  She turns back the way she came.  Beebe's floodlamps stain the darkness with dirty light; the station, bloated and angular, pulls against the cables holding it down.  Light pours from its lower surface like feeble rocket exhaust.  Pinned face-down in that glare, Acton lies unmoving on the bottom. 
Reluctantly, she swims closer.  "Acton?"
He doesn't move.
"Acton?"  She's back in the light now.  Her shadow cuts him in half.
At last he looks up.  "It'ssss—" 
He seems surprised by the sound of his own transmuted voice.
He puts his hand to his throat.  "I'm not—breathing—" he buzzes.
She doesn't answer. 
He looks back down.  There's something on the bottom, a few centimeters from his face.  Clarke drifts closer; a tiny shrimplike creature trembles on the substrate.
"What is it?"  Acton asks.
"Something from the surface.  It must have come down on the 'scaphe."
"But it's—dancing—"
She sees.  The jointed legs flex and snap, the carapace arches to some insane inner rhythm.  It seems so brittle a life; perhaps the next spasm, or the next, will shatter it.
"It's a seizure," she says after a while.  "It doesn't belong here.  The pressure makes the nerves fire too fast, or something."
"Why doesn't that happen to us?"
Maybe it does.  "Our implants.  They pump us full of neuroinhibitors whenever we go outside."
"Oh.  Right," Acton buzzes softly.  Gently, he reaches out to the creature.  Takes it in the palm of his hand.
Crushes it.
Clarke hits him from behind.  Acton bounces off the seabed, his hand flying open; fragments of shell, of watery flesh swirl in the water.  He kicks, rights himself, stares at Clarke without speaking.  His eyecaps shine almost yellow in the light.
"You asshole,"  Clarke says very quietly.  
"It didn't belong here," Acton buzzes.
"Neither do we."
"It was suffering.  You said so yourself."
"I said the nerves fired too fast, Acton.  Nerves carry pleasure as well as pain.  How do you know it wasn't dancing for fucking joy?"
She pushes off the bottom and kicks furiously into the abyss.  She wants to reach into Acton's body and tear everything out, sacrifice that gory tangle of viscera and machinery to the monsters at the rift.  She can't remember ever being so angry.  She tells herself she doesn't know why.

#
Gurgles and clanks from below.  Clarke looks down through the lounge hatch in time to see the airlock spill open.  Brander backs out, supporting Acton.
Acton's 'skin is laid open at the thigh.
He bends over, removing his flippers.  Brander's are already off; he turns to Clarke as she climbs down the ladder.  "He met his first monster.  Gulper eel."
"I met my fucking monster all right," Acton says in a low voice.  And Clarke sees it coming a fraction of a second before—
—Acton is on Brander, left fist swinging like a bolo on the end of his arm, once twice three times and Brander is on the floor, bleeding.  Acton's bringing his foot back when Lenie gets in front of him, her hands raised  to protect herself, crying "Stop it stop it's not his fault!" but somehow it's not Acton she's pleading with it's something inside of him coming out, and she'd do anything if it would only please God go back where it came from—
It stares through Acton's milky eyes and snarls, "The fucker saw it coming at me!  He let that thing tear my leg open!"
Lenie shakes her head.  "Maybe not.  You know how dark it is out there, I've been down here longer than anyone and they sneak up on me all the time, Acton.  Why would Brander want to hurt you?"
She hears Brander coming to his feet behind her.  His voice carries over her shoulder:  "Brander sure as shit wants to hurt him n—"
She cuts him off.  "Look, I can handle this."  Her words are for Brander; her eyes remain locked with Acton's. "Maybe you should go to Medical, make sure you're okay."
Acton leans forward, tensed.  The thing inside waits and watches. 
"This asshole—"  Brander begins.
"Please, Mike."  It's the first time she has ever used his first name.
There's a moment of silence.  
"Since when did you ever get involved?" he says behind her.  
It's a good question.  Brander's footsteps shuffle away before she can think of an answer.
Something in Acton goes back to sleep.
"You'd better go there too," Clarke says to him.  "Later." 
"Nah.  It wasn't that tough.  I was surprised how feeble it was, after I got over the size of the fucking thing."
"It ripped your diveskin.  If it could do that, it wasn't as weak as you think.  At least check it out; your leg might be lacerated."
"If you say so.  Although I'll bet Brander needs Medical more than I do."  He flashes a predatory grin, and moves to pass her.
"You might also consider reining in your temper," she says as he brushes past.
Acton stops.  "Yeah.  I was kind of hard on him, wasn't I?"
"He won't be as eager to help you out the next time you get caught in a smoker." 
"Yeah," he says again.  Then:  "I don't know, I've always been sort of—you know—"
She remembers a word someone else used, after the fact.  "Impulsive?"
"Right.  But really I'm not that bad.  You just have to get used to me." 
Clarke doesn't answer.
"Anyhow," he says, "I guess I owe your friend an apology."
My friend.  And by the time she gets over that jarring idea, she's alone again.

#

Five hours later Acton's in Medical.  Clarke passes the open hatchway and glances in; he sits on an examination table, his 'skin undone to the waist.  There's something wrong with the image.  She stops and leans through the hatch.
Acton has opened himself up.  She can see the flesh peeled back around the water intake, the places where meat turns to plastic, the tubes that carry blood and the ones that carry antifreeze.  He holds a tool in one hand; it disappears into the cavity, the spinning thing on its tip whirring quietly.
Acton hits a nerve somewhere, and jumps as if shocked.
"Are you damaged?"  Clarke asks.
He looks up. "Oh.  Hi."
She points at his dissected thorax.  "Did the gulper—"
He shakes his head. "No.  No, it just bruised my leg a bit.  I'm just making some adjustments."
"Adjustments?"
"Fine-tuning."  He smiles.  "Settling-in stuff."
It doesn't work.  The smile is hollow, somehow.  Muscles stretch lips in the usual way, but the gesture's imprisoned in the lower half of his face.  Above it, his capped eyes stare cold as drifted snow, innocent of any topography.  She wonders why it has never bothered her before, and realizes that this is the first time she's ever seen a Rifter smile.
"That's not supposed to be necessary," she says.
"What's not?"  Acton's smile is beginning to wear on her.
"Fine-tuning.  We're supposed to be self-adjusting."
"Exactly.  I'm adjusting myself."
"I mean—"
"I know what you mean," Acton says. "I'm—customizing the job."  His hand moves around inside his rib cage as if autonomous, tinkering.  "I figure I can get better performance if I nudge the settings just a bit outside the approved specs." 
Clarke hears a brief, Lilliputian screech of metal against metal.
"How?" she asks.
Acton withdraws his hand, folds flesh back over the hole.  "Not exactly sure yet."  He runs another tool along the seam in his chest, sealing himself. He shrugs back into his 'skin, seals that as well.  Now he's as whole as any rifter.
"I'll let you know next time I go outside," he says, laying a casual hand on Clarke's shoulder as he squeezes past.
She almost doesn't flinch.
Acton stops.  He seems to look right around her. 
"You're nervous," he says, slowly. 
"Am I."
"You don't like being touched."  His hand rests on her collarbone like an insult.
She remembers: she has the same armor that he does.  She relaxes fractionally.  "It's not a general thing," she lies.  "Just some people."
Acton seems to weigh the jibe, decide whether it's worthy of a response. His hand withdraws.
"Kind of an unfortunate quirk in a place as small as this," he says, turning away.
	Small?   I've got the whole goddamn ocean!  But Acton's already climbing upstairs. 

#
The new smoker is erupting again.  Water shoots scalding from the chimney at the north end of the Throat, curdles and mixes with deep icy saline; microbes caught in the turbulence luminesce madly.  The water fills with the hiss of unformed steam, aborted by the weight of three hundred atmospheres.
Acton is ten meters above the seabed, awash in rippling blue light.  
She glides up from underneath.  "Nakata said you were still out here," she buzzes at him.  "She said you were waiting for this thing to go off." 
He doesn't even look at her.  "Right."
"You're lucky it did.  You could have been waiting out here for days."  Clarke turns away, aims herself at the generators.
"And I think," Acton says, "it'll stop in a minute or two."
She twists around and faces him.  "Look, all these eruptions are..." she rummages for the word, "chaotic."
"Uh huh."
"You can't predict them."
"Hey, the Pompeii worms can predict them.  The clams and brachyurans can predict them.  Why not me?"
"What are you talking about?"
"They can tell when something's going to blow.  Take a look around sometime, you'll see for yourself.  They react before it even happens."
She looks around.  The clams are acting just like clams. The worms are acting just like worms.  The brachyurans scurry around the bottom the way brachyurans always do.  "React how?"
"Makes sense, after all.  These vents can feed them or parboil them. After a few million years they've learned to read the signs, right?"
The smoker hiccoughs.  The plume wavers, light dimming at its edges.
Acton looks at his wrist.  "Not bad."
"Lucky guess," Clarke says, her vocoder hiding uncertainty.
The smoker manages a couple of feeble bursts and subsides completely.  	
Acton drifts closer.  "You know, when they first sent me down here I thought this place would be a real shithole.  I figured I'd just knuckle down and do my time and get out.  But it's not like that.  You know what I mean, Lenie?"
I know.  But she doesn't answer.
"I thought so," he says, as though she has.  "It's really kind of...well, beautiful, in a way.  Even the monsters, once you get to know 'em.  We're all beautiful."
He seems almost gentle.
Clarke dredges her memory for some sort of defense.  "You couldn't have known," she says.  "Way too many variables.  It's not computable.  Nothing down here's computable."
An alien creature looks down at her and shrugs.  "Computable?  Probably not.  But knowable..."
There's no time for this, Clarke tells herself.  I've got to get to work.
"...that's something else again,"  Acton says.

#

She never figured him for a bookworm.  Still, there he is again, plugged into the library.  Stray light from the eyephones leaks across his cheeks. 
He seems to be spending a lot of time in there these days.  Almost as much time as he spends outside.
Clarke glances down at the flatscreen as she wanders past.  It's dark.
"Chemistry," Brander says from across the lounge.
She looks at him.
Brander jerks his thumb at the oblivious Acton.  "That's what he's into.  Weird shit.  Boring as hell."
That's what Ballard was into, just before...  Clarke fingers a spare headset from the next terminal.
"Ooh, you're walking a fine line there," Brander remarks.  "Mr. Acton doesn't like people reading over his shoulder."
Then Mr. Acton will be in privacy mode and I won't be able to.  She sits down and slips the headset on.  Acton has not invoked privacy; Clarke taps into his line without any trouble.  The eyephone lasers etch text and formulae across her retinas.   Serotonin.  Acetylcholine.  Neuropeptide moderation.  Brander's right:  it's really boring.
Someone's touching her.
She does not yank the headset off.  She removes it calmly.  She doesn't even flinch, this time.  She will not give him the satisfaction.
Acton has turned in his chair to face her, headset dangling around his neck.   His hand is on her knee.
"Glad to see we have common interests," he says quietly.  "Not that surprising, though.  We do share a certain ... chemistry..."
"That's true."  She stares back, safe behind her eyecaps.  "Too bad I'm allergic to shitheads."
He smiles. "Of course, it would never work.  The ages are all wrong."  He stands up, returns the headset to its hook.  
"I'm not nearly old enough to be your father."
He crosses the lounge and climbs downstairs.
"What an asshole," Brander remarks.
"He's more of a prick than Fischer ever was.  I'm surprised you're not picking fights with him all the time."
Brander shrugs.  "Different dynamic.  Acton's just an asshole.  Fischer was a fucking pervert."
Not to mention that Fischer never fought back.  She keeps the insight to herself. 

#
Concentric circles, glowing emerald.  Beebe Station sits on the bullseye.  Intermittent blobs of weaker light litter the display:  fissures and jagged rock outcroppings, endless muddy plains, the Euclidean outlines of human machinery all reduced to a common acoustic currency.
There's something else out there too, part Euclid, part Darwin.  Clarke zooms in.  Human flesh is too much like seawater to return an echo, but bones show up okay.  The machinery inside is even clearer, it shouts at the faintest sonar signal.  Clarke focuses the display, points at a translucent green skeleton with clockwork in its chest.
"That him?"  Caraco says.
Clarke shakes her head.
"Maybe it is.  Everyone else is—"
"It's not him."  Clarke touches a control.  The display zooms back to maximum range. "You sure he's not in his quarters?"
"He left the station seven hours ago.  Hasn't been back since."
"Maybe he's just hugging the bottom.  Maybe he's behind a rock."
"Maybe."  Caraco sounds unconvinced.
Clarke leans back in her chair.  The back of her head touches the rear wall of the cubby.  "Well, he's doing his job okay.  When he's off shift he can go wherever he likes, I guess." 
"Yeah, but this is the third time.  He's always late.  He just wanders in whenever he likes—"
"So what?"  Clarke, suddenly tired, rubs the bridge of her nose between thumb and forefinger.  "We don't run on dryback schedules here, you know that.  He pulls his weight, don't fuck with him."
"Well, Fischer was always getting shit for being l—"
"Nobody cared if Fischer was late," Clarke cuts in.  "They just— wanted an excuse."
Caraco leans forward.  "I don't like him," she confides.
"Acton?  No reason you should.  He's psycho.  We all are, remember?"
"But he's different, somehow.  You know that."
"Lubin nearly killed his wife down at Galapagos before they assigned him here.  Brander's got a history of attempted suicide."
Something changes in Caraco's stance.  Clarke can't be sure, but the other woman's gaze seems to have dropped to the deck.  Touched a nerve there, I guess.
She continues, more gently.  "You're not worried about the rest of us, are you?  So what's so special about Acton?"
"Oh," Caraco says.  "Look."
On the tactical display, something has just moved into range.
Clarke zooms in on the new reading; it's too distant for good resolution, but there's no mistaking the hard metallic blip in its center.
"Acton," she says.
"Um...how far?" Caraco asks in a hesitant voice.
Clarke checks.  "He's about nine hundred meters out.  Not too bad, if he's using a squid."
"He's not.  He never does."
"Hmm.  At least he seems to be beelining in."  Clarke looks up at Caraco.  "You two are on shift when?"
"Ten minutes."
"No big deal.  He'll be fifteen minutes late.  Half hour tops."
Caraco stares at the display.  "What's he doing out there?"
"I don't know,"  Clarke says.  She wonders, not for the first time, if Caraco really belongs down here.  She just doesn't seem to get it, sometimes.
"I was wondering if you could maybe talk to him," Caraco says.
"Acton?  Why?"
"Nothing.  Forget it."
"Okay." Clarke rises from the Communications chair.  Caraco backs out of the hatchway to let her past.
"Um, Lenie..."
Clarke turns.	
"What about you?"  Caraco asks.
"Me?"
"You said Lubin nearly killed his wife.  Brander tried to kill himself. What did you do, I mean, to...qualify?"
Clarke watches her steadily.
"I mean, I guess, if it's not too—"
"You don't understand," Clarke says, her voice absolutely level.  "It's not how much shit you've raised that suits you for the rift.  It's how much you've survived."
"I'm sorry."  Caraco manages, with eyes utterly devoid of feeling, to look abashed.
Clarke softens a bit.  "In my case," she says, "Mostly I just learned to roll with the punches.  I haven't done much worth bragging about, you know?"
I'm sure enough working on it, though.

#
She doesn't know how it could have happened so fast.  He's been here only two weeks, yet the 'lock can barely contain his eagerness to get outside.  The chamber floods, she feels a single shiver scurry along his body; and before she can move, Acton hits the latch and they drop outside.
He coasts out from under the station, his trajectory an effortless parallel of her own.  Clarke fins off towards the Throat.  She feels Acton at her side, although she cannot see him.  His headlamp, like hers, stays dark; for her it's become a gesture of respect to the more delicate lanterns that dwell here.
She doesn't know what Acton's reasoning is.
He doesn't speak until Beebe's a dirty yellow smudge behind them.  "Sometimes I wonder why we ever go back inside."
It can't be happiness in that voice.  How could any emotion make it through the mechanical gauntlet that lets people speak out here?
"I fell asleep near the Throat yesterday," he says.
"You're lucky something didn't eat you," she tells him.
"They're not so bad.  You just have to know how to relate to them."
Clarke wonders if he relates to other species with the same subtlety that he relates to his own.  She keeps the question to herself.
They swim through sparse, living starlight for a while.  Another smudge glimmers ahead, weak and sullen; the Throat, dead on target.  It's been months now since Clarke has even thought of the guide rope that's supposed to lead them back and forth, like blind troglodytes.  She knows where it is, but she never uses it.  Other senses come awake down here.  Rifters don't get lost. 
Except Fischer, maybe.  And Fischer was lost long before he came down here.
"So what happened to Fischer, anyway?"  Acton says.
The chill starts in her chest, reaches her fingers before the sound of Acton's voice has died away.  It's a coincidence.  It's a perfectly normal question to ask.
"I said—"
"He disappeared," Clarke says.
"They told me that much," Acton buzzes back.  "I thought you might have a bit more insight."
"Maybe he fell asleep outside.  Maybe something ate him."
"I doubt that."
"Really?  And what makes you such an expert, Acton?  You've been down here for what, two weeks now?"
"Only two weeks?  Seems longer.  Time stretches when you're outside, doesn't it?"
"At first," Clarke says.
"You know why Fischer disappeared?" 
"No."
"He outlived his usefulness."
"Ah." Her machine parts turn it into half creak, half growl. 
"I'm serious, Lenie."  Acton's mechanical voice does not change.  "You think they're going to let you stay down here forever?  You think they'd let people like us down here at all if they had any choice?" 
She stops kicking.  Her body continues to coast.  "What are you talking about?"
"Use your head, Lenie.  You're smarter than I am, inside at least. You've got the keys to the city here—you've got the keys to the whole fucking seaboard, and you're still acting like a victim."  Acton's vocoder gurgles indecipherably—a laugh, mistransposed?  A snarl? 
More words:  "They count on that, you know."
Clarke starts kicking again, stares ahead to the brightening glow of the Throat.
It isn't there.
There's a moment's disorientation — We can't be lost, we were headed right for it, has the power gone out? — before she sees the familiar streak of coarse yellow light, bearing four o'clock.
How could I have gotten turned around like that?
"We're here," Acton says.
"No.  The Throat's way over—"
A nova flares beside her, drenching the abyss with blinding light.  It takes Clarke's eyecaps a moment to adjust; when the starbursts have faded from her eyes, the ocean is a muddy black backdrop for the bright cone from Acton's headlamp.
"Don't," she says.  "It gets so dark when you do that, you can't see anything—"
"I know.  I'll turn it off in a moment.  Just look."
His beam shines down on a small rocky outcropping rising from the mud, no more than two meters across.  Jagged cookie-cutter flowers litter its surface, radial clusters shining garish red and blue in the artificial light. Some of them lie flat along the rock face.  Others are contorted into frozen calcareous knots, clenched around things Clarke can't see.
Some of them move, slowly.
"You brought me out here to look at starfish?"  She tries, and fails, to squeeze some hint of bored contempt through the vocodor.  But inside there's a distant, frightened amazement that he has led her here, that she could be guided, utterly unsuspecting, so completely off course.  And how did he find this place?  No sonar pistol, compass doesn't work worth shit this close to the Throat...
"I figured you probably hadn't looked at them very closely before," Acton says.  "I thought you might be interested."
"We don't have time for this, Acton."
His hands reach down into the light and lock onto one of the starfish. They peel it slowly from the rock; there are filaments of some kind along the creature's underside, anchoring it to the substrate.  Acton's efforts tear them free, a few at a time.
He holds the animal up for Clarke's inspection.  Its upper surface is colored stone, encrusted with calcareous spicules.  Acton flips it over.  The underside writhes with hundreds of thick squirming threads, jammed into dense rows along the length of each arm.  Each thread has a tiny sucker at its tip.
"A starfish," Acton tells her, "is the ultimate democracy."
Clarke stares, quietly repelled.
"This is how they move," Acton is saying.  "They walk along on all these tube feet.  But the weird thing is, they have no brains at all.  Not surprising for a democracy."
Rows of squirming maggots.  A forest of translucent leeches, groping blindly into the water.
"So there's nothing to coordinate the tube feet, they all move independently.  Usually that's not a problem; they all tend to go towards food, for example.  But it's not unusual for a third of these feet to be pulling in some other direction entirely.  The whole animal's a living tug-o-war.  Sometimes, some really stubborn tube feet just don't give up, and they literally get torn out at the roots when the others move the body someplace they don't want to go.  But hey:  majority rules, right?"
Clarke extends a tentative finger.  Half a dozen tube feet latch onto it.  She can't feel them through her 'skin.  Anchored, they look almost delicate, like filaments of milky glass.
"But that's nothing," Acton says.  "Watch this."
He rips the starfish in half.
Clarke pulls back, shocked and angry.  But there's something in Acton's posture, in that barely visible outline behind his lamp, that makes her pause.
"Don't worry, Lenie," he says.  "I haven't killed it.  I've bred it."
He drops the torn halves.  They flutter like leaves to the seabed, trailing bits of bloodless entrail.
"They regenerate.  Didn't you know that?  You can tear them into pieces and each piece grows back the missing parts.  It takes time, but they recover. Only you end up with more of them.  Damn hard to kill these guys.
"Understand, Lenie?  Tear them to pieces, they come back stronger." 
"How do you know all this?"  she asks in a metallic whisper.  "Where do you come from?"
He lays an icy black hand on her arm.  "Right here.  This is where I was born."
She doesn't think it absurd.  In fact, she barely hears him.  Her mind is somewhere else entirely, terrified by a sudden realization.
Acton is touching her, and she doesn't mind.

#

Of course, the sex is electric.  It always is.  The familiar has reasserted itself, here in the cramped space of Clarke's cubby.  They can't both lie on the pallet at the same time but they manage somehow, Acton on his knees, then Clarke, squirming around each other in a metal nest lined with ducts and vents and bundles of optical cabling.  They navigate each others' seams and scars, tonguing puckers of metal and pale flesh, unseen and all-seeing behind their corneal armor.  
For Clarke it's a new twist, this icy ecstasy of a lover without eyes. For the first time she feels no need to avert her face, no threat to fragile intimacy; at first, when Acton moved to take out his caps, she stopped him with a touch and a whisper and he seemed to understand. 
They cannot lie together afterwards so they sit side-by-side, leaning into each other, staring at the hatch two meters in front of them.  The lights are turned too low for dryback vision; Clarke and Acton see a room suffused in pale fluorescence.
Acton reaches out and fingers a shard of glass sticking from an empty frame on one wall.  "There used to be a mirror here," he remarks.  
Clarke nibbles his shoulder.  "There were mirrors everywhere.  I—took them down." 
"Why?  A few mirrors would open the place up a bit.  Make it larger."
She points.  Several torn wires, fine as threads, hang from a hole in the frame.  "They had cameras behind them.  I didn't like that."
Acton grunts.  "I don't blame you."
They sit without speaking for a bit.
"You said something outside," she says.  "You said you were born down here."
Acton hesitates, then nods.  "Ten days ago."
"What did you mean?" 
"You should know," he says.  "You witnessed my birth."
She thinks back.  "That was when the gulper got you..."
"Close."  Acton grins his cold eyeless grin, puts an arm around her. "Actually, the gulper sort of catalyzed it, if I remember.  Think of it as a midwife."
An image pops into her mind:  Acton in Medical, vivisecting himself.
	"Fine-tuning," she says.
"Uh huh."  He gives her a squeeze.  "And I've got you to thank for it. You gave me the idea."
"Me?"
"You were my mother, Len.  And my father was this spastic little shrimp that ended up way over its head.  He died before I was born, actually:  I killed him.  You weren't very happy about that."
Clarke shakes her head.  "You're not making sense."
"You telling me you haven't noticed the change?  You telling me I'm the same person I was when I came down?"
"I don't know," she says.  "Maybe I've just gotten to know you better."
"Maybe.  Maybe I have too.  I don't know, Len, I just seem more...awake now, I guess.  I see things differently.  You must have noticed."
"Yeah, but only when you're—"
Outside.
"You did something to your inhibitors," she whispers.
"Reduced the dosage a bit."
She grasps his arm.  "Karl, those chemicals keep you from spazzing out every time you go outside.  You fuck with this stuff, you're risking a seizure as soon as the 'lock floods."
"I have been fucking with it, Lenie.  You see any change in me that isn't an improvement?"
She doesn't answer.
"It's all about action potential," he tells her.  "Your nerves have to build up a certain charge before they can fire—"
"And at this depth they'd fire all the time, Karl, please—"
"Shh."  He lays a gentle finger on her lips but she brushes it away, suddenly angry.
"I'm serious, Karl.  Without those drugs your nerves short-circuit, you burn out, I know—"
"You only know what they tell you," he snaps.  "Why don't you try working things out yourself for once?"
She falls silent, stung by his disapproval.  A space opens between them on the pallet.  
"I'm not a fool, Lenie," Acton says, more quietly.  "I just reduced the settings a bit.  Five percent.  Now, when I go outside it takes a bit less of a stimulus for my nerves to fire, that's all.  It...it wakes you up, Len; I'm more aware of things, I'm more alive somehow."
She watches him, unspeaking.
"Of course they say it's dangerous," he says.  "They're scared shitless of you already.  You think they're going to give you even more of an edge?"
"They're not scared of us, Karl."
"They should be."  His arm goes back around her.  "Wanna try it?"
It's as though she's suddenly outside, still naked.  "No."
"There's nothing to worry about, Len.  I've already done the guinea pig work on myself.  Open up to me and I could make the adjustments myself, it'd take ten minutes."
"I'm not up for it, Karl.  Not yet, anyway.  Maybe one of the others is."
He shakes his head.  "They don't trust me."
"You can't blame them."
"I don't."  He grins, showing teeth as sharp and white as eyecaps.  "But even if they did trust me, they wouldn't do anything unless you thought it was okay."
She looks at him.  "Why not?"
"You're in charge here, Len."
"Bullshit.  They never told you that."
"They didn't have to.  It's obvious."
"I've been down here longer than them.  So's Lubin.  That doesn't matter to anyone." 
Acton frowns briefly.  "No, I don't think it does.  But you're still leader of the pack, Len.  Head wolf.  A-fucking-kayla."
Clarke shakes her head.  She searches her memory for something, anything, that would contradict Acton's absurd claim.  She comes up empty.
She feels a little sick inside.
He gives her a little squeeze.  "Tough luck, lover.  I guess the clothes don't fit so well after being a career victim your whole life, eh?"
Clarke stares at the deck.
"Think about it, anyway," Acton whispers in her ear.  "I guarantee you'll feel twice as alive as you do now."
"That happens anyway," Clarke reminds him.  "Whenever I go outside.  I don't need to screw up my internals for that."  Not those internals, anyway.
"This is different," he insists.
She looks at him and smiles, and hopes he doesn't push it.  How can he expect me to let him cut me open like that? she wonders, and then wonders if maybe someday she will, if the fear of losing him might somehow grow large enough to force her other fears into submission.  It wouldn't be the first time.
Twice as alive, Acton says.  Hiding behind her smile, Clarke considers:  twice as much of her life.  Not a great prospect, so far.

#
There's a light from behind; it chases her shadow out along the seabed.  She can't remember how long it's been there.  She feels a momentary chill—
—Fischer?—
—before common sense sets in.  Gerry Fischer wouldn't use a headlamp.
"Lenie?"
She revolves on her own axis, sees a silhouette hovering a few meters away.  Cyclopean light glares from its forehead. Clarke hears a subvocal buzz, the corrupted equivalent of Brander clearing his throat.  "Judy said you were out here," he explains.
"Judy."  She means it as a question, but her vocoder loses the intonation.
"Yeah.  She sort of, keeps tabs on you sometimes."
Clarke considers that a moment.  "Tell her I'm harmless."
"It's not like that," he buzzes.  "I think  she just ... worries..."
 Clarke feels muscles twitching at the corners of her mouth.  She thinks she might be smiling.
"So I guess we're on shift," she says, after a moment.
The headlight bobs up and down.  "Right.  A bunch of clams need their asses scraped.  More skilled labor."
She stretches, weightless.  "Okay.  Let's go."
"Lenie..."
She looks up at him.
"Why do you come— I mean, why here?"  Brander's headlight sweeps the bottom, comes to rest on an outcropping of bone and rotted flesh.  A skeletal smile stitches its way across the lit circle.  "Did you kill it, or something?"
"Yeah, I—" She falls silent, realizing:  He means the whale. 
"Nah," she says instead. "It just died on its own."

#

Of course she wakes up alone.  They still try to sleep together sometimes, after sex has made them too lazy to go outside.  But the bunk is too small.  The most they can manage is a sort of diagonal slouch:  feet on the floor, necks bent up against the bulkhead, Acton cradling her like a living hammock.  If they're unlucky they really do fall asleep like that.  It takes hours to get the kinks out afterwards.  Way more trouble than it's worth.
So she wakes up alone.  But she misses him anyway.
It's early.  The schedules handed down from the GA are increasingly irrelevant — circadian rhythms lose their way in the incessant darkness, fall slowly out of phase — but the rubbery timetable that remains leaves hours before her shift starts.  Lenie Clarke is awake in the middle of the night.  It seems like a stupid and obvious thing to say, months from the nearest sunrise, but right now it seems especially true.
In the corridor she turns for a moment in the direction of his cubby before she remembers.  He's never in there any more.  He's never even inside, unless he's eating or working or being with her.  He hasn't slept in his quarters almost since they got involved.  He's getting almost as bad as Lubin.
Caraco is sitting silently in the lounge, unmoving, obeying her own inner clock.  She looks up as Clarke crosses to Comm.
"He went out about an hour ago," she says softly.
Sonar picks him up fifty meters southeast, barely echoing above the bottom clutter.  Clarke heads for the ladder.
"He showed us something the other day," Caraco says after her.  "Ken and me."
Clarke looks back.
"A smoker, way off in one corner of the Throat.  It had this weird fluted vent, and it made singing sounds, almost..."
"Mmm." 
"He really wanted us to know about it, for some reason.  He was really excited.  He's — he's kind of strange out there, Lenie..."
"Judy," Clarke says neutrally, "Why are you telling me this?"
Caraco looks away.  "Sorry. I didn't mean anything."
Clarke starts down the ladder.
"Just be careful, okay?" Caraco calls after her.
He's curled up when Clarke reaches him, knees tucked under his chin, floating a few centimeters above a stone garden.  His eyes are open, of course.  She reaches out, touches him through two layers of reflex copolymer.
He barely stirs.  His vocoder emits sporadic ticking noises.
Lenie Clarke curls herself around him.  In a womb of freezing sea water, they sleep on until morning.



SHORT CIRCUIT
I won't give in.
It would be so easy.  She could live out there, stay the fuck away from this creaking eggshell except to eat and bathe and do whatever parts of her job demand an atmosphere.  She could spend her whole life flying across the seabed.  Lubin does.  Brander and Caraco and even Nakata are starting to.
Lenie Clarke knows she doesn't belong in here.  None of them do.
But at the same time, she's scared of what outside might do to her.  I could end up like Fischer.  It would be so easy to just— slip away.  If a hot seep or mud slide didn't get me first.
Lately she's been valuing her own life quite a lot.  Maybe that means she's losing it.  What kind of a rifter cares about living?  But there it is: the rift is starting to scare her.
That's bullshit.  Complete, total bullshit.
Who wouldn't be scared?
Scared.  Yes.  Of Karl.  Of what you'll let him do to you.
It's been, what, a week now?—
Two days.
—two days since she's slept outside.  Two days since she decided to incarcerate herself in here.  She goes outside to work, and comes back as soon as each shift ends.  No one's mentioned the change to her.  Perhaps no one's noticed;  if they don't come back to Beebe themselves after work, they scatter off across the sea bed to do whatever they do in splendid, freezing isolation.  
She knew Acton would notice, though.  He'd notice, and miss her, and follow her back inside.  Or maybe he'd try and talk her back out, fight with her when she resisted.  But he's shown no sign at all.  He spends as much time out there as he ever did.  She still sees him, of course.  At mealtimes.  At the library.  Once for sex, during which neither spoke of anything important.  And then gone again, back into the ocean.
He didn't enter into any pact with her.  She didn't even tell him about her pact with herself.  Still, she feels betrayed.
She needs him.  She knows what that means, sees her own footprints crowding the road ahead, but reading the signs and changing course are two completely different things.  Her insides are twisting with the need to go, whether out to him or just out she can't say.  But as long as he's outside and she's in Beebe, Lenie Clarke can tell herself that she's still in control.
It's progress, sort of.
Now, curled up in her cubby with the hatch sealed tight, she hears the subterranean gurgle of the airlock.  She comes up off the bed as though radio-controlled.
Noises, flesh against metal, hydraulics and pneumatics.  A voice.  Lenie Clarke is on her way to the wet room.
He's brought a monster inside with him. It's an anglerfish, almost two meters long, a jellylike bag of flesh with teeth half the length of Clarke's forearm.  It lies quivering on the deck, its insides exploded through its own mouth in the near vacuum of Beebe's sea-level atmosphere.  Dozens of miniature tails, twitching feebly, sprout everywhere from its body.
Caraco and Lubin, in the middle of some task, look over from the engineering 'lock.  Acton stands beside his catch; his thorax, still inflating, hisses softly.
"How did you fit it inside the 'lock?" Clarke wonders.
"More to the point," Lubin says, coming over, "why bother?"
"What're all those tails?" Caraco says.
Acton grins at them.  "Not tails.  Mates."
Lubin's face doesn't change. "Really."
Clarke leans forward.  Not just tails, she sees now; some of them have those extra fins along the side and back.  Some of them have gills.  A couple of them even have eyes.  It's as though a whole school of tiny anglers are boring into this big one.  Some are in only as far as their jaws, but others are buried right down to the tail.
Another thought strikes her, even more revolting; the big fish doesn't need its mouth any more.  It's just engulfing the little ones across its body wall, like some giant devolving microbe.
"Group sex on the rift," says Acton.  "All the big ones we've been seeing, they're female.  The males are these little finger-sized fuckers here.  Not many dating opportunities this far down, so they just latch on to the first female they can find, and they sort of fuse — their heads get absorbed, their bloodstreams link together.   They're parasites, get it?  They worm into her side and they spend their whole lives feeding off her.  And there's a fuck of a lot of them, but she's bigger than they are, she's stronger, she could eat them alive if she just—"
"He's been in the library again," Caraco remarks.
Acton looks at her for a moment.  Deliberately, he points at the bloated carcass on the deck.  "That's us."  He grabs one of the parasitic males, rips it free.  "This is everyone else.  Get it?"
"Ah," Lubin says.  "A metaphor.  Clever."
Acton takes a single step towards the other man.  "Lubin, I am getting awfully fucking tired of you."
"Really."  Lubin doesn't seem the least bit threatened.
Clarke moves; not directly between them, just off to one side, forming the apex of a human triangle.  She has absolutely no idea what to do if this comes to blows.  She has no idea what to say to stop that from happening.
Suddenly, she's not even sure that she wants to.
"Come on, you guys."  Caraco leans back against the drying rack.  "Can't you settle this some other way?  Maybe you could just whip out a ruler and  compare your dicks or something."
They stare at her.
"Watch it, Judy.  You're getting pretty cocky there."
Now they're staring at Clarke.
Did I say that?
For a long, long moment nothing happens.  Then Lubin grunts and goes back to the workshop.  Acton watches him go; then, deprived of an immediate threat, he steps back into the airlock.
The dead angler shivers on the deck, bristling with infestation.
"Lenie, he's really getting weird," Caraco says as the 'lock floods.  "Maybe you should just let him go."
	Clarke just shakes her head.  "Go where?"
She even manages a smile.

#
She was looking for Karl Acton, but somehow she's found Gerry Fischer instead.  He looks sadly down at her through the length of a long tunnel.  He seems to be a whole ocean away.  He doesn't speak but she senses sadness, disappointment.  You lied to me, that feeling says.  You said you'd come and see me and you lied.  You've forgotten all about me.
He's wrong.  She hasn't forgotten him at all.  She's only tried to.
She doesn't say it aloud, of course, but somehow he reacts to it anyway.  His feelings change; sadness fades, something colder seeps up in its place, something so deep and so old that she can't think of words to describe it.
Something pure.
From behind, a touch on her shoulder.  She spins, instantly alert, hand closing around her billy.
"Hey, calm down.  It's me."  Acton's silhouette hangs against a faint wash of light from the direction of the Throat.  Clarke relaxes, pushes gently at his chest.  Says nothing.
"Welcome back," Acton says.  "Haven't seen you out here for a while."
"I was— I was looking for you," she says.
"In the mud?"
"What?"
"You were just floating there, face down."
"I was—"  She feels a vestige of disquiet, but she can't remember what to attach it to.  "I must have drifted off.  I was dreaming.  It's been so long since I slept out here, I—"
"Four days, I think.  I missed you."
"Well, you could have come inside."
Acton nods.  "I tried.  But I could never get all of me through the airlock, and the part that I could— well, it was sort of a poor substitute.  If you'll remember."
"I don't know, Karl.  You know how I feel—"
"Right. And I know you like it out here as much as I do.  Sometimes I feel like I could just stay out here forever."  He pauses for a moment, as if weighing alternatives.  "Fischer's got it right."
Something goes cold.  "Fischer?"
"He's still out here, Len.  You know that."
"You've seen him?"
"Not often.  He's pretty skittish."
"When do...I mean—"
"Only when I'm alone.  And pretty far from Beebe."
She looks around, inexplicably frightened.  Of course you can't see him.  He isn't here.  And even if he was, it's still too dark to...
She forces herself to leave her headlamp doused. 
"He's...I think he's really hooked in to you, Len.  But I guess you know that too."
No.  No, I didn't.  I don't.  "He talks to you?"   She doesn't know why she'd resent that.
	"No."
"Then how?"
Acton doesn't answer for a moment.  "I don't know.  I just got that impression.  But he doesn't talk.  It's...I don't know, Len.  He just hangs around out there and watches us.  I don't know if he's what we'd consider ... sane, I guess—" 
"He watches us," she says, buzzing low and level.
"He knows we're together.  I think...I think he figures that connects me and him somehow."  Acton is silent for a bit.  "You cared about him, didn't you?"
Oh yes.  It always starts off so innocently.  You cared about him, that's nice, and then it's did you find him attractive and then well you must have done something or he wouldn't keep hitting on you and then you fucking slut I'll—
"Lenie," Acton says.  "I'm not trying to start anything."
She waits and watches.
"I know there was nothing going on.  And even if there was, I know it's no threat."
She's heard this part before, too.
"Now that I think about it, that's always been my problem," Acton muses.  "I always had to go on what other people told me, and people— people lie all the time, Len, you know that.  So no matter how many times she swears she's not fucking around on you, or even that she doesn't want to fuck around on you, how can you ever really know?  You can't.  So the default assumption is, she's lying.  And being lied to all the time, that's a damn good reason for — well, for doing what I do sometimes." 
"Karl — you know—"
"I know you don't lie to me.  You don't even hate me.  That's kind of a change."
She reaches out to touch the side of his face.  "I'd say that's a good call.  I'm glad you trust me."
"Actually, Len, I don't have to trust you.  I just know."
"What do you mean?  How?"
"I'm not sure," he says.  "It's something to do with the changes."
He waits for her to respond.
"What are you saying, Karl?"  she says at last.  "Are you saying you can read my mind?"
"No.  Nothing like that.  I just, well, I identify with you more.  I can— it's kind of hard to explain—"
She remembers him levitating beside a luminous smoker:  the Pompeii worms can predict them.  The clams and brachyurans can predict them. Why not me? 
He's tuned in, she realizes.  To everything.  He's even tuned into the bloody worms, that's what he—
He's tuned in to Fischer—
She tongues the light switch.  A bright cone stabs into the abyss.  She sweeps the water around them.  Nothing.
"Have the others seen him?"
"I don't know.  I think Caraco caught him on sonar once or twice."
"Let's go back," Clarke says.
"Let's not.  Stay a while.  Spend the night."
She looks straight into his empty lenses.  "Please, Karl.  Come with me.  Sleep inside for a bit."
"He's not dangerous, Len."
"That's not it."  At least, that's not all.
"What, then?"
"Karl, has it ever occurred to you that you might be developing some sort of dependence on this nerve rush of yours?"
"Come on, Len. The rift gives us all a rush.  That's why we're down here."
"We get a rush because we're fucked in the head.  That doesn't mean we should go out of our way to augment the effect."
"Lenie—"
"Karl."  She lays her hands on his shoulders.  "I don't know what happens to you out here.  But whatever it is, it scares me." 
He nods.  "I know."
"Then please, please try it my way.  Try sleeping inside again, just for a while.  Try not to spend every waking moment climbing around on the bottom of the ocean, okay?"
"Lenie, I don't like myself inside.  You don't even like me inside."
"Maybe.  I don't know.  I just — I just don't know how to deal with you when you're like this."
"When I'm not about to beat the shit out of anyone?  When I'm acting like a rational human being?  If we'd had this conversation back at Beebe we'd be throwing things at each other by now."  He falls silent for a moment.  Something changes in his posture.  "Or do you miss that, somehow?"
"No.  Of course not," she says, surprised at the thought.
"Well, then—"
"Please.  Just— indulge me.  What harm can it do?"
He doesn't answer.  But she has a sneaking suspicion that he could.

#

She has to give him credit.  His reluctance shows in every move, but he's even first through the airlock.  Something happens to him as it drains, though; the air rushes into him and — displaces something else, somehow.  She can't quite put her finger on it.  She wonders why she's never noticed it before. 
As a reward, she takes him directly into her cubby.  He fucks her up against the bulkhead, violently, with no discretion at all.  Animal sounds echo through the hull.  She wonders, as he comes, if the noise is bothering the others.

#
"Have any of you," Acton says, "thought about why things are so fucking grotty down here?"
It's a strange and wondrous occasion, as rare as a planetary conjunction.  All the circadian clocks have drifted together for an hour or two, drawn everyone to dinner at the same time.  Almost everyone;  Lubin is nowhere to be seen.  Not that he ever contributes much to the conversation anyway.
"What do you mean?" Caraco says.
"What do you think I mean?  Look around, for Chrissake!"   Acton waves his arm, taking in the lounge.  "The place is barely big enough to stand up in.  Everywhere you look there's fucking pipes and cables.  It's like living in a service closet."
Brander frowns around a mouthful of rehydrated potato.
"They were on a very strict schedule,"  Nakata suggests.  "It was important to get everything online as quickly as possible.   Perhaps they just didn't have time to make everything as cushy as they could have."
Acton snorts.  "Come on, Alice.  How much extra time would it take to program the blueprints for decent headroom?"
"I feel a conspiracy theory coming on," Brander remarks.  "So go on, Karl.  Why's the GA going out of its way to make us bump our heads all the time?  They breeding us for short height, maybe?  So we'll eat less?"
Lenie Clarke feels Acton tensing; it's like a small shockwave pushed out by his clenching muscles, a pulse of tension that ripples through the air and breaks against her 'skin.  She rests one calming hand casually on his thigh, under the table.  It's a calculated risk, of course.  It would piss him off even more if Acton thought he was being patronized.
This time he relaxes a little.  "I think they're trying to keep us off balance.  I think they deliberately designed Beebe to stress us out."
"Why?"  Caraco again, tense but civil.
"Because it gives them an advantage.  The more time we spend being on edge, the less time we have to think about what we could do to them if we really wanted to."
"And what's that?"
"Use your head, Judy.  We could black out the grid from the Charlottes down to Portland."
"They'd just switch feeds," Brander says.  "There are other deep stations."
"Yeah.  And they're all staffed by people just like us."  Acton slaps the table with one hand.  "Come on, you guys.  They don't want us down here.  They hate us, we're sickos that beat up our wives and eat our babies for breakfast.  If it weren't for the fact that anyone else would flip out down here—"
Clarke shakes her head.  "But they could get us out of the loop completely if they wanted.  Just automate everything."
"Hallelujah." Acton brings his hands together in sarcastic applause.   "The woman's got it at last."
Brander leans back in his chair.  "Give it a rest, Acton.  Haven't you ever worked for the GA before?  You ever work for any sort of bureaucracy?"
Acton's gaze swivels, locks on to the other man.  "What's your point?"  
Brander looks back with a hint of a sneer on his face.  "My point, Karl, is that you're reading way too much into this.  So they made the ceilings too low.  So their interior decorator's not worth shit.  So what else is new?  The GA just isn't that scared of you."  He takes in Beebe with a wave of his arm. "This isn't some subtle psychological war.  Beebe was just designed by incompetent bozos."  Brander stands up, takes his plate to the galley.  "If you don't like the headroom, stay outside." 
Acton looks at Lenie Clarke, his face utterly devoid of expression.  "Oh, I'd like to.  Believe me." 

#
He's hunched over the library terminal, 'phones on his ears, 'phones on his eyes, the flatscreen blanked as usual to hide his litsearch from view. As if anything in the database could really be personal.  As if the GA would ever ration out any fact worth hiding.
She's learned not to bother him when he's like this.   He's hunting in there, he resents any distraction as though the files he's after might somehow escape if he looks the other way.  She doesn't touch him.  She doesn't run a gentle finger along his arm or try to work the knots from his shoulders.  Not any more.  There are some mistakes that Lenie Clarke can learn from.
He's actually helpless in a strange way; cut off from the rest of Beebe, deaf and blind to the presence of people who are by no means friends.  Brander could come up behind him right now and plant a knife in his back.  And yet everyone leaves him alone.  It's as though his sensory exile, this self-imposed vulnerability is some sort of brazen dare that no one has the guts to take him up on.  So Acton sits at the keyboard— tapping at first, now stabbing— in his own private datasphere, and his deaf blind presence somehow dominates the lounge out of all proportion to his physical size.
"FUCK!"
He tears the 'phones from his face and slams his fist down on the console.  Nothing even cracks.  He glares around the lounge, white eyes blazing, and settles on Nakata over in the galley.  Lenie Clarke, wisely, has avoided eye contact.
"This database is fucking ancient!  They stick us down this fucking black anus for months at a time and they don't even give us a link to the net!"
Nakata spreads her hands.  "The net's infected," she says, nervously.  "They send us scrubbed downloads every month or s—"
"I fucking know that."  Acton's voice is suddenly, ominously calm.  Nakata takes the hint and falls silent.
He stands up.  The whole room seems to shrink down around him.  "I've got to get out of here," he says at last.  He takes a step towards the ladder, glances at Clarke.  "Coming?"
She shakes her head. 
"Suit yourself."

#

Caraco, maybe.  She's made overtures in the past.
Not that Clarke ever took them.  But things are changing.  There aren't just two Karl Actons any more.  There used to be; all of her partners have been twosomes, in fact.  There's always been a host, some magnetic chassis whose face and name never mattered because it would change without warning.  And providing continuity, riding along behind each twinkling pair of eyes, there's always been the thing inside, and it never changes.  Nor, to be honest, would Lenie Clarke know what to do if it did.  
Now there's something new:  the thing outside.  So far at least, it has shown no trace of violence.  It does seem to have x-ray vision, which could be even worse.
Lenie Clarke has always slept with the thing inside.  Until now, she'd always just assumed it was for want of an alternative. 
She taps lightly on Caraco's hatch.  "Judy?  You there?"  She should be; she's nowhere else in Beebe, and sonar can't find any trace of her outside.
No answer.
It can wait.
No.  It's waited long enough.
How would I feel if—
She isn't me.
The hatch is closed but not dogged.  Clarke pulls it open a few centimeters and peers inside. 
Somehow they've managed to pull it off.  Alice Nakata and Judy Caraco spoon around each other on that tiny bunk.  Their eyes dart restlessly beneath closed lids.  Nakata's dreamer stands guard beside them, its tendrils pasted to their bodies.
Clarke lets the hatch hiss shut again.
It was a stupid idea, anyhow.  What would she know?
She wonders how long they've been together, though.  She never even saw that coming. 

#
"Your boyfriend isn't here,"  Lubin calls in.  "We were supposed to top up the coolant on number seven."
Clarke calls up the topographic display.  "How long ago?"
"Oh four hundred."  
"Okay."  Acton's half an hour late.  That's unusual; he's been going out of his way to be punctual these days, a grudging concession to Clarke in the name of group relations.  "I can't find him on sonar," she reports.  "Unless he's hugging the bottom.  Hang on."
She leans out of the comm cubby.  "Hey.  Anybody see Karl?"
"He left a while ago," Brander calls from the wet room.  "Maintenance on seven, I think."
Clarke punches back into Lubin's channel.  "He's not here.  Brander says he left already.  I'll keep looking."
"Okay.  At least his deadman switch hasn't gone off."  Clarke can't tell whether Lubin thinks that's good or bad.
Movement at the corner of her eye.  She looks up; Nakata's standing in the hatchway.
"Have you found him?" she asks.
Clarke shakes her head.
"He was in Medical, just before he left," Nakata says.  "He was open.  He said he was making some adjustments—"
Oh God.
"He said they improved performance outside, but he didn't explain.  He said he would show me later.  Maybe something went wrong."
External camera display, ventral view.  The image flickers for a moment, then clears; on the screen, a scalloped circle of light lies across a flat muddy plain, transected by the knife-edge shadows of anchor cables.  Near the edge of that circle is a black human figure, face down, its hands held to either side of its head.
She wakes up the close acoustics.   "Karl!  Karl, can you hear me?"
He reacts.  His head twists around, faces up into the floods; his eyecaps reflect featureless white glare into the camera.  He's shaking.
"His vocoder," Nakata says.  There's sound coming from the speaker, soft, repetitive, mechanical.  "It's— stuttering—"
Clarke's already in the wet room.  She knows what Acton's vocoder is saying.  She knows, because the same word is repeating over and over in her own head.
No.  No.  No.  No.  No.

#

No obvious motor impairment.  He's able to make it back inside on his own; stiffens, in fact, when Clarke tries to help him.  He strips his gear and follows her into Medical without a word.
Nakata, diplomatically, closes the hatch behind them
Now he sits on the examination table, stonefaced.  Clarke knows the routine; get his 'skin off, his eyecaps out.  Check autonomic pupil response and reflex arcs.  Stab him, draw off the usual samples: blood gases, acetylcholine, GABA, lactic acid.
She sits down beside him.  She doesn't want his eyecaps out.  She doesn't want to see behind them.
"Your inhibitors,"  she says at last.  "How far down are they?"
"Twenty percent."
"Well."  She tries for a light touch.  "At least we know your limit now.  Just nudge them back up to normal."
Almost imperceptibly, he shakes his head.
"Why not?"
"Too late.  I went over some sort of threshold.  I don't think — it doesn't feel reversible."
"I see."  She puts one tentative hand on his arm.  He doesn't react.  "How do you feel?"
"Blind.  Deaf."
"You're not, though."
"You asked how I felt," he says, still expressionless.
"Here."  She takes the NMR helmet down from its hook.  Acton lets her strap it across his skull.  "If there's anything wrong, this should—"
"There's something wrong, Len."
"Well."  The helmet writes its impressions across the diagnostic display.  Clarke's got the same medical expertise they all have, stuffed into her mind by machines that hijacked her dreams.  Still, the raw data mean nothing to her.  It's almost a minute before the display prints out an executive summary.
"Your synaptic calcium's way down."  She's careful not to show her relief.  "Makes sense, I guess.  Your neurons fire too often, eventually they run out of something."
He looks at the screen, saying nothing. 
"Karl, it's okay."  She leans toward his ear, one hand on his shoulder.  "It'll fix itself.  Just put your inhibitors back up to normal; demand goes down, supply keeps up.  No harm done." 
He shakes his head again. "Won't work."
"Karl, look at the readout. You're going to be fine."
"Please don't touch me," he says, not moving at all.


CRITICAL MASS
She catches a glimpse of fist before it hits her eye.  She staggers back against the bulkhead, feels some protruding rivet or valve catch the back of her head.  The world drowns in explosions of afterlight.
He's lost control, she thinks dully.  I win.  Her knees collapse under her; she slides down the wall, sits with a heavy thud on the deck.  She considers it a matter of some pride that she's kept utterly silent through all this.
I wonder what I did to set him off.  She can't remember.  Acton's fist seems to have knocked the past few minutes out of her head.  Doesn't matter anyway.  Same old dance.
But this time there seems to be someone on her side.  She can hear shouts, sounds of a scuffle.  She hears the sick jarring thud of flesh against bone against metal, and for once, none of it seems to be hers.
"You cocksucker!  I'll rip your fucking balls off!"
Brander's voice.  Brander is sticking up for her.  He always was the gallant one.  Clarke smiles, tastes salt.  Of course, he never quite forgave Acton for that tiff over the gulper, either...
Her vision is starting to clear, in one eye at least.  There's a leg right in front of her, another to one side.  She looks up; the legs meet at Caraco's crotch.  Acton and Brander are in her cubby too; Clarke's amazed that they can all fit.
Acton, his mouth bloody, is under siege.  Brander's hand is at his throat. Acton has the wrist of that hand caught in a grip of his own; while Clarke watches, his other arm lashes out and glances off Brander's jaw.
"Stop it," she mumbles.
Caraco hits Acton's temple twice in rapid succession.  Acton's head snaps sideways, snarls, but he doesn't release his grip on Brander.
"I said stop it!"
This time they hear her.  The struggle slows, pauses; fists remain poised, no holds break, but they're all looking at her now.
Even Acton.  Clarke looks up into his eyes, looks behind them.  She can see nothing staring back but Acton himself.  You were there before, she remembers.  I'm almost sure of it.  Count on you to get Acton into a losing fight and then bugger off...
She braces herself against the bulkhead and pushes slowly erect.  Caraco moves aside, helps her up.
"I'm flattered by all the attention, folks," Clarke says, "and I want to thank you for stopping by, but I think we can handle this on our own from here on in."
Caraco puts a protective hand on her shoulder.  "You don't have to put up with this shit."  Her eyes, somehow venomous through the shielding, are still locked on Acton.  "None of us do."
One corner of Acton's mouth pulls back in a small, bloody sneer.
Clarke endures Caraco's touch without flinching.  "I know that.  And thanks for stepping in.  But please, just leave us alone for a while."
Brander doesn't loosen his grip on Acton's throat.  "I don't think that a very good—"
"Will you get your fucking hands off him and leave us alone!"
They back off.  Clarke glares after them, dogs the hatch to keep them out.  "Goddamned nosy neighbors," she grumbles, turning back to Acton.
His body sags in the sudden privacy, all the anger and bravado evaporating as she watches.
"Want to tell me why you're being such an asshole?" she says.
Acton collapses on her pallet.  He stares at the deck, avoiding her eyes.  "Don't you know when you're being fucked over?"
Clarke sits down beside him.  "Sure.  Getting punched out is pretty much a giveaway." 
"I'm trying to help you.  I'm trying to help all of you."  He turns and hugs her, body shaking, cheek pressed against hers, face aimed at the bulkhead behind her shoulder.  "Oh God Lenie I'm so sorry you're the last person in the whole fucking world I want to hurt—"
She strokes him without speaking.  She knows he means it.  They always do.  She still can't bring herself to blame any of them.
He thinks he's alone in there.  He thinks it's all his own doing.
Briefly, an impossible thought:  Maybe it is...
"I can't go on with this," he says.  "Staying inside."
"It'll get better, Karl.  It's always hard at first."
"Oh God, Len.  You don't have a clue.  You still think I'm some sort of junkie."
"Karl—"
"You think I don't know what addiction is?  You think I can't tell the difference?"
She doesn't answer. 
He manages a small, sad laugh.   "I'm losing it, Len.  You're forcing me to lose it.  Why in God's name do you want me this way?"
"Because this is who you are, Karl.  Outside isn't you.  Outside's a distortion."
"Outside I'm not an asshole.  Outside I don't make everyone hate me."
"No."  She hugs him.  "If controlling your temper means seeing you turn into something else, seeing you doped up all the time, then I'll take my chances with the original."
Acton looks at her.  "I hate this.  Jesus Christ, Len.  Won't you ever get tired of people who kick the shit out of you?"
"That's a really nasty thing to say," she remarks quietly.
"I don't think so.  I can remember some things I saw out there, Len.  It's like you need —I mean God, Lenie, there's so much hate in all of you..."
She's never heard him speak like this.  Not even outside.  "You've got a bit of that in you too, you know."
"Yeah.  I thought it made me different.  I thought it gave me...an edge, you know?"
"It does."
He shakes his head.  "Oh, no.  Not next to you."
"Don't underrate yourself.  You don't see me trying to take on the whole station."
"That's just it, Len.  I blow it off all the time, I waste it on stupid shit like this.  But you— you hoard it."  His expression changes, she's not exactly sure what to.  Concern, maybe.  Worry.  "Sometimes you scare me more than Lubin does.  You never lash out, or beat on anybody — Christ, it's a major event when you even raise your voice — so it just builds up.  It's got its up side, I guess."  He manages a soft laugh.  "Hatred's a great fuel source.  If anything ever—activated you, you'd be unstoppable.  But now, you're just—toxic.  I don't think you really know how much hate you've got in you."
Pity?
Something inside her goes suddenly cool.  "Don't play therapist with me, Karl.  Just because your nerves fire too fast doesn't mean you've got second sight.  You don't know me that well."
Of course not.  Or you wouldn't be with me.
"Not in here."  He smiles, but that strange sick expression keeps showing through behind.  "Outside, at least, I can see things.  In here I'm blind."
"You're in the land of the blind."  She says curtly.  "It's not a drawback."
"Really?  Would you stay here if it meant getting your eyes cut out?  Would you stay some place that rotted your brain out piece by piece, turned you from a human being into a fucking monkey?"
Clarke considers.  "If I was a monkey to begin with, maybe."
Uh oh.  Sounded too flippant by half, didn't I?
Acton looks at her for a moment.  Something else does too, drowsily, with one eye open.	
"At least I don't get my endorphins by playing victim," he says, slowly.  "You should really be a bit more careful who you choose to look down on."
"And you,"  Clarke replies, "should save the pious lectures for those rare occasions when you actually know what you're talking about."
He rises off the bed and glares at her, fists carefully unclenched.
Clarke does not move.  She feels her whole body hardening from the inside out.  She deliberately lifts her head until she's looking straight into Acton's hooded eyes.
It's in there now, fully awake.  She can't see Acton at all any more.  Everything's back to normal.
"Don't even try," she says.  "I gave you a couple of shots for old times' sake, but if you lay a hand on me again I swear I'll fucking kill you."
She marvels inwardly at the strength in her voice; it sounds like iron.
They stare at each other for an endless moment.
Acton's body turns on its heel and undogs the hatch.  Clarke watches it step out of the cubby;  Caraco, waiting in the corridor, lets it by without a word.  Clarke holds herself utterly still until she hears the 'lock beginning to cycle.
He didn't call my bluff.
Except this time, she's not sure that that's all it was.

#
He doesn't see her.
It's been days since they've said anything to each other.  Even their shift schedules have diverged.  Tonight, as she was trying to sleep, she heard him come out of the abyss again and climb up into the lounge like some invading sea creature.  He does it now and then when the place is deserted, when everyone is either outside or sealed into their cubicles.  He sits there at the library, diving through his 'phones down endless virtual avenues, desperation in every movement.  It's as though he has to hold his breath whenever he comes inside; once she saw him tear the headset off his skull and flee outside as though his chest would burst.  When she picked up the abandoned headset,  the results of his litsearch were still glowing in the eyephones.  Chemistry.
Another time he turned on his way out to see her standing in the corridor.  He smiled.  He even said something:  "—sorry—" is what she heard, but there may have been more.  He didn't stay.
Now his hands rest, unmoving, on the keyboard.  His shoulders are shaking.  He doesn't make any sound at all.  Lenie Clarke closes her eyes for a moment, wondering whether to approach him.  When she looks again the lounge is empty.

#

She can tell exactly where he's going.  His icon buds off of Beebe and crawls away across the display, and there's only on thing in that direction. 
When she gets there he's crawling across its back, digging a hole with his knife.  Clarke's eyecaps can barely find enough light to see by, this far from the Throat; Acton cuts and slices in the light of her headlamp, his shadow writhing away across a horizon of dead flesh.
He's dug a crater, maybe half a meter across, half a meter deep.  He's cut through the stratum of blubber below the skin and is tearing through the brown muscle beneath.  It's been months now since this creature landed here. Clarke marvels at its preservation.
The abyss likes extremes, she muses.  If it isn't a pressure cooker, it's a fridge.
Acton stops digging. He just floats there, staring down at his handiwork.
"What a stupid idea," he buzzes at last.  "I don't know what gets into me sometimes."  He turns to face her; his eyecaps reflect yellow.  "I'm sorry, Lenie.  I know this place was special to you somehow, I didn't mean to...well, desecrate it, I guess."
She shakes her head.  "It's okay.  It's not important."
Acton's vocoder gurgles; in air, it would be a sad laugh.  "I give myself too much credit sometimes, Len.  Whenever I'm inside, and I'm fucking up and I don't know what to do, I figure all I've got to do is come outside and the scales will fall off my eyes.  It's like, religious faith almost.  All the answers.  Right out here."
"It's okay," Clarke says again, because it seems better than saying nothing.
"Only sometimes the answer doesn't really do much for you, you know?  Sometimes the answer's just:  Forget it.  You're fucked."  Acton looks back down at the dead whale.  "Would you turn the light off?"
The darkness swallows them like a blanket.  Clarke reaches through it and brings Acton to her.  "What were you trying to do?"
That mechanical laugh again.  "Something I read.  I was thinking—"
	His cheek brushes against hers.  
"I don't know what I was thinking.  When I'm inside I'm a fucking lobo case, I get these stupid ideas and even when I get back out it takes a while before I really wake up and realize what a dork I've been.  I wanted to study an adrenal gland.  Thought it would help me figure out how to counter ion depletion at the synapse junctions."
"You know how to do that."
"Well, it was just bullshit anyway.  I can't think straight in there."
She doesn't bother to argue.
"I'm sorry," Acton buzzes after a while.
Clarke strokes his back.  It feels like two sheets of plastic rubbing together.
"I think I can explain it to you," he adds.  "If you're interested."
"Sure."  But she knows it won't change anything.
"You know how there's this strip in your brain that controls movement?"
"Okay."
"And if, say, you became a concert pianist, the part that runs your fingers would actually spread out, take up more of the strip to meet the increased demand for finger control.  But you lose something, too.  The adjacent parts of the strip get crowded out.  So maybe you couldn't wiggle your toes or curl your tongue as well as you could before you started practicing."
Acton falls silent.  Clarke feels his arms, cradling her loosely from behind.
"I think something like that happened to me," he says after a while.
"How?"
"I think something in my brain got exercised, and it spread out and crowded some other parts away.  But it only works in a high-pressure environment, you see, it's the pressure that makes the nerves fire faster.  So when I go back inside, the new part shuts down and the old parts have been — well, lost."
Clarke shakes her head.  "We've been through this, Karl.  Your synapses just ran low on calcium."
"That's not all that happened.  That's not even a problem any more, I've brought my inhibitors up again.  Not all the way, but enough.  But I still have this new part, and I still can't find the old ones."  She feels his chin on the top of her head.  "I don't think I'm exactly human any more, Len.  Which, considering the kind of human I was, is probably just as well."
"And what does it do, exactly?  This new part?"
He takes a while to answer.  "It's almost like getting an extra sense organ, except it's ... diffuse.  Intuition, only with a really hard edge."
"Diffuse, with a hard edge."
"Yeah, well. That's the problem when you try to explain smell to someone without a nose."
"Maybe it's not what you think.  I mean, something's changed, but that doesn't mean you can really just — look into people like that.  Maybe it's just some sort of  mood disorder.  Or a hallucination, maybe.  You can't know." 
"I know, Len."
"Then you're right."  Anger trickles up from her internal reservoir.   "You're not human any more.  You're less than human."
"Lenie—"
"Humans have to trust, Karl.  There's no big deal about putting your faith in something you know for certain.  I want you to trust me."
"Not know you."  
She tries to hear sadness on that synthetic voice.   In Beebe, maybe, it would have come through.  But in Beebe he would never had said that.
"Karl—"
"I can't come back."
"You're not yourself out here."  She pushes away, spins around; she can just barely distinguish his silhouette.  
"You want me to be—"  She hears confusion in the words, even through the vocoder, but she knows it's not a question.  "—hateful."
"Don't be an idiot.  I've had more than my fill of assholes, believe me.  But Karl, this is just some kind of cheap trick.  Step out of the magic booth, you're Mr. Nice Guy.  Step back in, you're the SeaTac Strangler.  It's not real." 
"How do you know?"
She keeps her distance, suddenly knowing the answer.  It's only real if it hurts.  It's only real if it happens slowly, painfully, each step carved in shouts and threats and thrown punches.  
It's only real if Lenie Clarke is the one to make him change.
She doesn't tell him any of this, of course.  But she's afraid, as she turns and leaves him there, that she doesn't have to.

#

She comes instantly out of sleep, tense and completely alert.  There's darkness — the lights are off, she's even blanked the readouts on the wall — but it's the close, familiar darkness of her own cubby.  Something is tapping on the hull, regular and insistent.
From outside.
Out in the corridor there's light enough for rifter eyes.  Nakata and Caraco stand motionless in the lounge.  Brander sits at the library; the screens are dark, the headsets all hanging on their pegs.
The sound ticks through the lounge, fainter than before but easily audible.
"Where's Lubin?"  Clarke asks softly.  Nakata tilts her head towards the hull:  outside somewhere.
Clarke climbs downstairs and into the airlock.

#
"We thought you'd gone over," she says.  "Like Fischer."
They float between Beebe and the sea floor.  Clarke reaches out to him.  Acton reaches back.
"How long has it been?"  The words come out as faint, metallic sighs.
"Six days.  Maybe seven.  I've been putting off— calling up for a replacement—"
He doesn't react.
"We saw you on sonar sometimes," she adds. "For a while.  Then you disappeared."
Silence.
"Did you get lost?"  she asks after a while.
"Yeah."
"But you're back now."
"No."
"Karl—"
"I need you to promise me something, Lenie."
"What?"
"Promise me you'll do what I did.  The others too.  They'll listen to you."
"You know I can't—"
"Five percent, Lenie.  Maybe ten.  If you keep it that low you'll do okay.  Promise."
"Why, Karl?"
"Because I wasn't wrong about everything.  Because sooner or later they're going to have to get rid of you, and you need every edge you can get."
"Come inside.  We can talk about it inside, everyone's there."
"There's strange things happening out there, Len.  Out past sonar range, they're — I don't know what they're doing.  They don't tell us..." 
"Come inside, Karl."
He shakes his head.  He seems almost unused to the gesture.
"—can't—"
"Then don't expect me—"
"I left a file in the library. It explains things.  As much as I could, when I was in there.  Promise me, Len."
"No.  You promise.  Come inside.  Promise we'll work it out." 
"It kills too much of me," he sighs.  "I pushed it too far.  Something burned out, I'm not even completely whole out here any more.  But you'll be okay.  Five or ten percent, no more."
"I need you," she buzzes, very quietly.
"No," he says.  "You need Karl Acton."
"What's that supposed to mean?"
"You need what he did to you."
All the warmth goes out of her then.  What's left is a slow, freezing boil.
"What is this, Karl?  Some grand insight you got while spirit-walking around in the mud?  You think you know me better than I do?"
"You know—"
"Because you don't, you know.  You don't know shit about me, you never did.  And you don't really have the balls to find out, so you run off into the dark and come back spouting all this pretentious bullshit."  She's goading him, she knows she's goading him but he's just not reacting.  Even one of his outbursts would be better than this.
"It's saved under Shadow," he says.  
She stares at him without speaking.
"The file," he adds.
"What's wrong with you?"  She's beating at him now, pounding as hard as she can but he's not hitting back, he's not even defending himself for Chrissakes why don't you fight back asshole why don't you just get it over with, just beat the shit out of me until the guilt covers us both and we'll promise never to do it again and—
But even anger deserts her now.  The inertia of her attack pushes them away from each other.  She catches herself on an anchor cable.  A starfish, wrapped around the line, reaches blindly out to touch her with the tip of one arm.
Acton continues to drift.
"Stay," she says.
He brakes and holds position without answering, dim and gray and distant.
There are so many things denied her out here.  She can't cry.  She can't even close her eyes.  So she stares at the sea bed, watches her own shadow stretch off into the darkness.  "Why are you doing this?"  she asks, exhausted, and wonders who she meant the question for.
His shadow flows across her own.  A mechanical voice answers:
"This is what you do when you really love someone."
She jerks her head up in time to see him disappear.

#

Beebe's quiet when she returns.  The wet slap of her feet on the deck is the only sound.  She climbs into the lounge and finds it empty.  She takes a step towards the corridor that leads to her cubby.
Stops.
In Comm, a luminous icon inches towards the Throat.  The display lies for effect; in reality Acton is dark and unreflective, no more luminous than she is.  
She wonders again if she should try and stop him.  She could never overpower him by force, but perhaps she just hasn't thought of the right thing to say.  Perhaps if she just gets it right she can call him back, compel his return through words alone.  Not a victim any more, he said once.  Perhaps she's a siren instead.
She can't think of anything to say.
He's almost there now.  She can see him gliding between great bronze pillars, bacterial nebulae swirling in his wake.  She imagines his face aimed down, scanning, relentless, hungry.  She can see him homing in on the north end of  Main Street.
She shuts off the display.
	She doesn't have to watch this.  She knows what's going on, and the machines will tell her when it's over.  She couldn't stop them if she tried, not unless she smashed them into junk.  That, in fact, is exactly what she wants to do.  But she controls herself.  Quiet as stone,  Lenie Clarke sits in the command cubby staring at a blank screen, waiting for the alarm.


Nekton

Dryback


JUMPSTART
He dreamed of water.  
He always dreamed of water.  He dreamed the smell of dead fish in rotten nets, and rainbow puddles of gasoline shimmering off the Steveston jetty, and a home so close to the shoreline you could barely get insurance.  He dreamed of a time when waterfront meant something, even the muddy brown stretch where the Fraser hemorrhaged into the Strait of Georgia.   His mother was standing over him, beaming  a vital ecological resource, Yves.  A staging ground for migrating birds.  A filter for the whole world.  And little Yves Scanlon smiled back, proud that he alone of all his friends— well, not friends exactly, but maybe they would be now— would grow up appreciating nature first-hand, right here in his new back yard.  One and a half meters above the high-tide line.
And then, as usual, the real world kicked in the doors and electrocuted his mother in mid-smile.
Sometimes he could postpone the inevitable.  Sometimes he could fight the jolt from his bedside dreamer, keep it from dragging him back for just a few more seconds.   Thirty years of random images would flash across his mind in those moments; falling forests, bloating deserts, ultraviolet fingers reaching ever deeper into barren seas.  Oceans creeping up shorelines.  Vital ecological resources turning into squatting camps for refugees.  Squatting camps turning into intertidal zones.
And Yves Scanlon was awake again, sweat-soaked, teeth clenched, jump-started.
God, no.  I'm back.
The real world.
Three and a half hours.  Only three and a half hours...
	It was all the dreamer would allow him.  Sleep stages one through four got ten minutes each.  REM got thirty, in deference to the incompressibility of the dream state.   A seventy-minute cycle, run three times nightly. 
You could freelance.  Everyone else does.
Freelancers chose their own hours.  Employees— those few that remained— got their hours chosen for them.  Yves Scanlon was an employee.  He frequently reminded himself of the advantages:  you didn't have to fight and scramble for a new contract every six months.  You had stability, of a sort.  If you performed.  If you kept on performing.  Which meant, of course, that Yves Scanlon couldn't afford the nightly nine-and-a-half-hours that was optimal for his species.
Servitude for security, then.  No day passed when he didn't hate the choice he'd made.  Some day, perhaps, he'd even hate it more than he feared the alternative.
"Seventeen items on high priority," said the  workstation as his feet hit the floor.  "Four broadcast, twelve net, one phone.  Broadcast and phone items are clean.  Net items were disinfected on entry, with a forty percent chance that encrypted bugs slipped through."
"Up the disinfectant," Scanlon said.
"That will destroy any encrypted bugs, but might also destroy up to five percent of the legitimate data.  I could just dump the risky files."
"Disinfect them.  What's on midlist?" 
"Eight hundred and sixty three items.  Three hundred twenty seven broad—"
"Dump it all."  Scanlon headed for the bathroom, stopped.  "Wait a minute.  Play the phone call."
"This is Patricia Rowan," the station said in a cold, clipped voice.  "We may be encountering some personnel problems with the deep-sea geothermal program.  I'd like to discuss them with you.  I'll have your return call routed direct."
Shit.  Rowan was one of the top corpses on the west coast.  She'd barely even acknowledged him since he'd been hired on at the GA.  "Is there a priority on that call?" Scanlon asked.
"Important but not urgent," the workstation replied
He could have breakfast first, maybe go through his mail.  He could ignore all those reflexes urging him to drop everything and jump like a trained seal to immediate attention.  They needed him for something.  About time.  About goddamned time.
"I'm taking a shower," he told the workstation, hesitantly defiant.  "Don't bother me until I come out."
His reflexes, though, didn't like it at all.

#

"—that 'curing' victims of multiple personality disorder is actually tantamount to serial murder.  The issue has remained controversial in the wake of recent findings that the human brain can potentially contain up to one hundred forty fully-sentient personalities without significant sensory/motor impairment.  The tribunal will also consider whether encouraging a multiple personality to reintegrate voluntarily — again, a traditionally therapeutic act — should be redefined as assisted suicide.  Crosslinked to next item under cognition and legal."
The workstation fell silent.
Rowan wants to see me.  The VP in charge of the GA's whole Northwest franchise wants to see me.  Me.
He was thinking into sudden silence.  Scanlon realised the workstation had stopped talking.  "Next," he said.
"Fundamentalist acquitted of murder in the destruction of a smart gel," the station recited.  "Tagged to—"
Didn't she say I'd be working with her, though?  Wasn't that the deal when I first came on?
"—AI, cognition, and legal."   
Yeah.  That's what they said.  Ten years ago.
"Ahh—  summary, nontechnical," Scanlon told the machine.
"Victim was a smart gel on temporary loan to the Ontario Science Center as part of a public exhibit on artificial intelligence.  Accused admitted to the act, stating that neuron cultures" —the workstation changed voices, neatly inserting a sound bite— "desecrate the human soul.  
"Expert defense witnesses, including a smart gel online from Rutgers, testified that neuron cultures lack the primitive midbrain structures necessary to experience pain, fear, or a desire for self-preservation.  Defense argued that the concept of a 'right' is intended to protect individuals from unwarranted suffering.  Since smart gels are incapable of physical or mental distress of any sort, they have no rights to protect regardless of their level of self-awareness.  This reasoning was eloquently summarized during the Defense's closing statement:  'Gels themselves don't care whether they live or die.  Why should we?'  The verdict is under appeal.  Crosslinked to next item under AI and World News."
Scanlon swallowed a mouthful of powdered albumin.  "List expert defense witnesses, names only."
"Phillip Quan.  Lily Kozlowski.  David Childs—"
"Stop."  Lily Kozlowski.  He knew her, from back at UCLA.  An expert witness.  Shit.  Maybe I should have kissed a few more asses in grad school... 
Scanlon snorted.  "Next."
"Net infections down fifteen percent."
Problems with the Rifters, she said.  I wonder...  "Summary, nontechnical."
"Viral infections on the Internet have declined fifteen percent in the past six months, due to the ongoing installation of smart gels at critical nodes along the net's backbone.  Digital infections find it nearly impossible to infect smart gels, each of which has a unique and flexible system architecture.  In light of these most recent results, some experts are predicting a safe return to casual e-mail by the end of—"
"Ah, fuck.  Cancel."
Come on, Yves.  You've been waiting for years for those idiots to recognise your abilities.  Maybe this is it.  Don't blow it by looking too eager.
"Waiting," said the station.
Only what if she doesn't wait?  What if she gets impatient and goes for someone else?  What if—
"Tag the last phone call and reply."  Scanlon stared at the dregs of his breakfast while the connection went up.
"Admin," said a voice that sounded real.
"Yves Scanlon for Patricia Rowan."
"Dr. Rowan is occupied.  Her simulator is expecting your call.  This conversation is being monitored for quality control purposes."  A click, and another voice that sounded real:  "Hello, Dr. Scanlon."
His Master's voice. 	



MUCKRAKER
It rumbles up the slope from the abyssal plain, bouncing an echo that registers five hundred meters outside Beebe's official sonar range.  It's moving at almost ten meters a second, not remarkable for a submarine but this thing's so close to the bottom it has to be running on treads.  Six hundred meters out it crosses a small spreading zone and slews to a stop.
"What is it?" wonders Lenie Clarke.
Alice Nakata fiddles with the focus.  The unknown has started up again at a crawl, edging along the length of the spread at less than one meter a second.
"It's feeding," Nakata says.  "Polymetallic sulfides, perhaps."
Clarke considers.  "I want to check it out."
"Yes.  Shall I notify the GA?"
"Why?"
"It is probably foreign.  It might not be legal."
Clarke looks at the other woman.
"There are fines for unauthorised incursions into territorial waters," Nakata says.
"Alice, really."  Clarke shakes her head.  "Who cares?"
Lubin is off the scope, probably sleeping on the bottom somewhere.  They leave him a note.  Brander and Caraco are out replacing the bearings on number six; a tremor cracked the casing last shift, jammed two thousand kilograms of mud and grit into the works.  Still, the other generators are more than able to take up the slack.  Brander and Caraco grab their squids and join the parade.
"We should keep our lights down," Nakata buzzes as they leave the Throat.  "And stay very close to the bottom. It may frighten easily."
They follow the bearing, their lights dimmed to embers, through darkness almost impenetrable even to rifter eyes.  Caraco pulls up beside Clarke:  "I'm heading into the wild blue yonder after this. Wanna come?"
A shiver of second-hand revulsion tickles Clarke's insides; from Nakata, of course.  Nakata used to join Caraco on her daily swim up Beebe's transponder line, until about two weeks ago.  Something happened up at the deep scattering layer — nothing dangerous, apparently, but it left Alice absolutely cold at the prospect of going anywhere near the surface.  Caraco's been pestering the others to pace her ever since.
Clarke shakes her head.  "Didn't you get enough of a workout slurping all that shit out of number six?"
Caraco shrugs. "Different muscle groups."
"How far do you go now?"
"Up to a thousand.  Give me another ten shifts and I'll be lapping all the way to the surface."
A sound has been rising around them, so gradually that Clarke can't pin down the moment she first noticed it; a grumbling, mechanical noise, the distant sound of rocks being pulverized between great molars.
Flickers of nervousness flash back and forth in the group.  Clarke tries to rein herself in.  She knows what's coming, they all do, it's not nearly as dangerous as the risks they face every shift.  It's not dangerous at all—
—unless it's got defenses we don't know about—
—but that sound, the sheer size of this thing on the scope— We're all scared.  We know there's nothing to be afraid of, but all we can hear are teeth gnashing in the darkness...
It's bad enough dealing with her own hardwired apprehension.  It doesn't help to be tuned in to everyone else's.
A faint pulse of surprise from Brander, in the lead.  Then from Nakata, next in line, a split-second before Clarke herself feels a slap of sluggish turbulence.  Caraco, forewarned, barely radiates anything when the plume washes over her.
The darkness has become fractionally more absolute, the water itself more viscous.  They hold station in a stream that's half mud, half seawater.
"Exhaust wake," Brander vibrates.  He has to raise his voice slightly to be heard over the sound of feeding machinery.
They turn and follow the trail upstream, keeping to the plume's edge more by touch than sight.  The ambient grumble swells to full-blown cacophony, resolves into a dozen different voices; pile-drivers, muffled explosions, the sounds of cement mixers.  Clarke can barely think above the waterborne racket, or the rising apprehension in four separate minds, and suddenly it's right there, just for a moment, a great segmented tread climbing up around a gear wheel two stories high, rolling away in the murk.
"Jesus.  It's fucking huge." Brander, his vocoder cranked.
They move together, aiming their squids high and cruising up at an angle.  Clarke tastes the thrill from three other sets of adrenals, adds her own and sends it back, a vicarious feedback loop.  With their lamps on minimum the viz can't be more than three meters; even in front of Clarke's face the world is barely more than shadows on shadows, dimly lit by headlights bobbing to either side. 
The top of the tread slides below them for a moment, a jointed moving road several meters across.  Then a plain of jumbled metal shapes, fading into view barely ahead, fading out again almost instantly;  exhaust ports, sonar domes, flow-meter ducts. The din fades a little as they move towards the center of the hull.
Most of the protuberances are smoothed back into hydrodynamic teardrops.  Close up, though, there's no shortage of handholds.  Caraco's smoldering headlight is the first to settle down onto the machine; her squid paces along above her.   Clarke sets her own squid to heel and joins the others on the hull.  So far there's been no obvious reaction to their presence.
They huddle together, heads close to converse above the ambient noise.  
"Where's it from?" Brander wonders.
"Probably Korea." Nakata buzzes back.  "I did not see any registry markings, but it would take a long time to check the whole hull."
Caraco:  "Bet you wouldn't find anything anyway.  If they were going to risk sneaking it this far into foreign territory they wouldn't be stupid enough to leave a return address."
The rumbling metal landscape pulls them along.  A couple of meters up, barely visible, their riderless squids trail patiently behind. 
"Does it know we're here?" asks Clarke.
Alice shakes her head.  "It kicks up a lot of shit from the bottom so it ignores close contacts.  Bright light might scare it, though.  It is trespassing.  It might associate light with discovery."
"Really."  Brander lets go for a moment, drifts back a few meters before catching another handhold.  "Hey Judy, want to go exploring?"
Caraco's vocoder emits static; Lenie feels the other woman's laughter from inside.  Caraco and Brander leap away into the murk like black gremlins.
"It moved very fast," Nakata says.  There's a sudden small blot of insecurity radiating from inside her, but she talks over it.  "When it first showed up on sonar.  It was moving way too fast.  It wasn't safe."
"Safe?"  Lenie frowns to herself.  "It's a machine, right?  No one inside."
Nakata shakes her head.  "Too fast for a machine in complex terrain.  A person could do it."
"Come on, Alice.  These things are robots.  Besides, if there was anyone inside we'd be able to feel them, right?  You feel anyone other than the four of us?"  Nakata tends to be a bit more sensitive than the others in matters of fine-tuning.
"I— don't think so," Nakata says, but Clarke senses uncertainty.  "Maybe I — it's a big machine, Lenie.  Maybe the pilot is just too far aw—"
Brander and Caraco are plotting something.  They're both out of sight — even their squids have left to keep them in range — but they're easily close enough for Clarke to sense a rising anticipation.  She and Nakata exchange looks.
"We better see what they're up to," Clarke says.  The two of them head off across the muckraker.
A few moments later, Brander and Caraco materialize in front of them.  They're crouched to either side of a metal dome about thirty centimeters across.  Several dark fisheyes stare out from its surface.
"Cameras?" Clarke asks.
"Nope," Caraco says.
"Photocells," Brander adds.
Lenie feels the beat before a punchline.  "Are you sure this is a good—"
"Let there be light!" cries Judy Caraco.  Beams stab out from her headlamp and Brander's, bathing the fisheyes at full intensity.
The muckraker stops dead.  Inertia pushes Clarke forward; she grabs and regains her balance, unexpected silence ringing in her ears.  In the wake of that incessant noise, she feels almost deaf.
"Whoa," Brander buzzes into the stillness.  Something ticks through the hull once, twice, three times.
The world lurches back into motion.  The landscape rotates around them, throws them together in a tangle of limbs.  By the time they've sorted themselves out they're accelerating.  The muckraker is grumbling again, but with a different voice; no lazy munching on polymetallics now, just a straight beeline for international waters.  Within seconds Clarke is hanging on for dear life.
"Yee-haw!" Caraco shouts.
"Bright light might scare it?" Brander calls from somewhere behind.  "I would say so!"
Strong feelings on all sides.  Lenie Clarke tightens her grip and tries to sort out which ones are hers.  Exultation spiked with primal, giddy fear; that's Brander and Caraco.  Alice Nakata's excited almost despite herself, but with more worry in the mix;  and here, buried somewhere down deep, almost a sense of — she can't tell, really.
Discontent?  Unhappiness?
Not really.
Is that me?  But that doesn't feel right either. 
Bright light pins Clarke's shadow to the hull, disappears an instant later.  She looks back; Brander's up above her somehow, swinging back and forth on a line trailing up into the water — could've sworn that wasn't there before — his beam waving around like a demented lighthouse.  Ribbons of muddy water stream past just above the deck, their edges writhing in textbook illustrations of turbulent flow.  
Caraco pushes off the hull and flies back up into the water.  Her silhouette vanishes into the murk, but her headlamp comes to rest and starts dipping around just behind Brander's.  Clarke looks over at Nakata, still plastered against the hull.  Nakata's feeling a little sick now, and even more worried about something...
"It is not happy!"  Nakata shouts.
"Hey; come on, groundhogs!"  Caraco's voice buzzes faintly.  "Fly!"
Discontent.  Something not expected.
Who is that? Clark wonders.
"Come on!"  Caraco calls again.
What the hell.  Can't hang on much longer anyway.  Clarke lets go, pushes off; the top of the muckraker races on beneath.  Heavy water drags the momentum from her.   She kicks for altitude, feels sudden expectation from behind — and in the next second something slams against her back, pushing her forward again.  Implants lurch against her ribcage.
"Jesus Christ!" Brander buzzes in her ear.  "Get a grip, Lenie!"
He's caught her on his way past.  Clarke reaches out and grabs the line that he and Caraco are attached to.  It's only as thick as her finger, and too slippery to hang on to.  She looks back and sees that the other two have looped it around their chests and under their arms, leaving their hands more or less free.  She tries the same trick, drag arching her back, while Caraco calls out to Nakata.
Nakata is not eager to let go.  They can feel that, even though they can't see her.  Brander angles back and forth, tacking his body like a rudder; the three of them swing in a grand, barely controlled arc, knotted into the middle of their tether.  "Come on, Alice!  Join the human kite! We'll catch you!"
And Nakata's coming, she's coming, but she's doing it her own way.  She's climbed sideways against the current, hand over hand, until she found the place where the line joins the deck.  Now she's letting drag push her back along the filament to them.
Clarke has finally secured herself in a loop.  Speed digs the line into her flesh; it's already starting to hurt.  She doesn't feel much like a human kite.  Bait on a hook is more like it.  She twists around to Brander, points at the line:  "What is this, anyway?"
"VLF antennae.  Unspooled when we scared it.  Probably crying for help."
"It won't get any, will it?"
"Not on this side of the ocean.  It's probably just making a last call so its owners'll know what happened.  Sort of a suicide note."
Caraco, entangled a bit further back, twists around at that.  "Suicide?  You don't suppose these things self-destruct?"
Sudden concern settles over the human kite. Alice Nakata tumbles into them.
"Maybe we ought to let it go," Clarke says.
Nakata nods emphatically.  "It is not happy."   Her disquiet radiates through the others like a warning light.
It takes a few moments to disentangle themselves from the antennae.   It whips past and away, trailing a small float like a traffic cone.  Clarke tumbles, lets the water brake her.  Machine roars recede into grumbles, into mere tremors.
The rifters hang in empty midwater, silence on all sides.
Caraco points a sonar pistol straight down, fires.  "Jeez.  We're almost thirty meters off the bottom."
"We lose the squids?" Brander says.   "That thing was really moving."
Caraco raises her pistol, takes a few more readings.  "Got 'em.  They're not all that far off, actually, I — hey."
"What?" 
"There's five of them.  Closing fast."
"Ken?"
"Uh huh."
"Well.  He's saving us a swim, anyway," Brander says.
"Did anyone—"
They turn.  Alice Nakata starts again:  "Did anyone else feel it?"
"Feel what?" Brander begins, but Clarke is nodding.
"Judy?"  Nakata says.
Caraco radiates reluctance.  "I — there was something, maybe.  Didn't get a good fix on it.  I assumed it was one of you guys."
"What,"  Brander says.  "The muckraker?  I thought—"
A black cipher rises in their midst.  His squid cruises straight up from underneath like a slow missile.  It hovers overhead when he releases it.  A couple of meters below, four other squids bob restlessly at station-keeping, noses up.
"You lost these," Lubin buzzes.
"Thanks," Brander replies.
Clarke concentrates, tries to tune Lubin in.  She's only going through the motions, of course.  He's dark to them.  He's always been dark, fine-tuning didn't change him a bit.  Nobody knows why.
"So what's going on?" he asks. "Your note said something about a muckraker."
"It got away from us," Caraco says.
"It was not happy," Nakata repeats.
"Yeah?"
"Alice got some sort of feeling off of it," Caraco says.  "Lenie and me too, sort of."
"Muckrakers are unmanned," Lubin remarks.
"Not a man," Nakata says.  "Not a person.  But—"  She trails off.
"I felt it," Clarke says. "It was alive."

#

Lenie Clarke lies on her bunk, alone again.  Really alone.  She can remember a time, not so long ago, when she reveled in this kind of isolation.  Who would have thought that she'd miss feelings?
Even if they are someone else's.
And yet it's true.  Every time Beebe takes her in, some vital part of her falls away like a half-remembered dream.  The airlock clears, her body reinflates, and her awareness turns flat and muddy.  The others just vanish.  It's strange; she can see them, hear them the way she always could.  But if they don't move and she closes her eyes, she's got no way of knowing they're here.
Now her only company is herself.  Just one set of signals to process in here.  Nothing jamming her.
Shit.
Blind, or naked.  That was the choice.  It nearly killed her.  My own damn fault, of course.  I was just  asking for it.
She was, too.  She could have just left everything the way it was, quietly deleted Acton's file before anyone else found out about it.  But there'd been this debt.  Something owed to the ghost of the Thing Outside, the thing that didn't snarl or blame or lash out, the thing that, finally, took the Thing Inside away where it couldn't hurt her any more.  Part of Lenie Clarke still hates Acton for that, on some sick level where conditioned reflex runs the show; but even down there, she thinks maybe he did it for her.  Like it or not, she owed him.
So she paid up.  She called the others inside and played the file.  She told them what he'd said, that last time, and she didn't ask them to turn their backs on his offering even though she desperately hoped they would.  If she had asked, perhaps, they might have listened.  But one by one, they split themselves open and made the changes.  Mike Brander, out of curiosity.  Judy Caraco, out of skepticism.  Alice Nakata, afraid of being left behind.  Ken Lubin, unsuccessfully, for reasons he kept to himself.
She clenches her eyelids, remembers rules changing overnight.  Careful appearances suddenly meant nothing; blank eyes and ninja masks were just cosmetic affectations, useless as armor.  How are you feeling, Lenie Clarke?  Horny, bored, upset?  So easy to tell, though your eyes are hidden behind those corneal opacities.  You could be terrified.  You could be pissing in your 'skin and everyone would know. 
Why did you tell them? Why did you tell them?  Why did you tell them?
Outside, she watched the others change.  They moved around her without speaking, one connecting smoothly with another to lend a hand or a piece of equipment.  When she needed something from one of them, it was there before she could speak.  When they needed something from her they had to ask aloud, and the choreography would falter.   She felt like the token cripple in a dance troupe.  She wondered how much of her they could see, and was afraid to ask.
Inside, sometimes, she would try.  It was safer there; the thread that connected the rest of them fell apart in atmosphere, put everyone back on equal terms.  Brander spoke of a heightened awareness of the presence of others;  Caraco compared it to body language.  "Just sort of makes up for the eyecaps," she said, apparently expecting Clarke to feel reassured at that.
But it was Alice Nakata who finally remarked, almost offhandedly, that other people's feelings could be... distracting...
Lenie Clarke's been tuned for a while now.  It's not so bad.  No precise telepathic insights, no sudden betrayals.  It's more like the sensation from a ghost limb, the ancestral memory of a tail you can almost feel behind you.  And Clarke knows now that Nakata was right.  Outside, the feelings of the others trickle into her, masking, diluting.  Sometimes she can even forget she has any of her own.
There's something else, too, a familiar core in each of them, dark and writhing and angry. That doesn't surprise her.  They don't even talk about it.  Might as well discuss the fact that they all have five fingers on each hand.

#

Brander's busy at the library; Clarke can hear Nakata in Comm, on the phone.
"According to this," Brander says, "They've started putting smart gels in muckrakers."
"Mmm?"
"It's a pretty old file," he admits.  "It'd be nice if the GA would download a bit more often, infections or no infections.  I mean, we are single-handedly keeping the western world safe from brownouts, it wouldn't kill them to—"
"Gels," Clarke prompts.
"Right.  Well, they've always needed neural nets in those things, you know, they wander around some pretty hairy topography — you hear about those two muckrakers that got caught up in the Aleutian Trench?  — anyway, navigation through complex environments generally needs a net of some sort.  Usually it's gallium-arsenide based, but even those don't come close to matching a human brain for spatial stuff.  They still just crawled when it came to figuring seamounts, that sort of thing.  So they've started replacing them with smart gels."
Clarke grunts.  "Alice said it was moving too fast for a machine."
"Probably was.  And smart gels are made out of real neurons, so I guess we tune in to them the same way we tune in to each other.  At least, judging by what you guys felt — Alice said it wasn't happy."
"It wasn't." Clarke frowns.  "It wasn't unhappy either, actually, it wasn't really an emotion at all, it was just —  well, surprised, I guess.  Like, like a sense of — divergence.  From what was expected."
"Hell, I did feel that," Brander says.  "I thought it was me."
Nakata emerges from Comm.  "Still no word on Karl's replacement.  They say the new recruits still are not through training.  Cutbacks, they say."
By now it's a running joke.  The GA's new recruits have to be the slowest learners since the eradication of Down's Syndrome.  Almost four months now and Acton's replacement still hasn't materialized. 
Brander waves one hand dismissively.  "We've been doing okay with five." He shuts down the library and stretches.  "Anyone seen Ken, by the way?"
"He is just outside," Nakata says.  "Why?"
"I'm with him next shift; got to set up a time.  His rhythm's been a bit wonky the past couple of days."
"How far out is he?"  Clarke asks suddenly.
Nakata shrugs.  "Maybe ten meters, when I last checked."
He's in range.  There are limits to fine-tuning.  You can't feel someone in Beebe from as far as the Throat, for example.  But ten meters, easy.
"He's usually further out, isn't he?"  Clarke speaks softly, as if afraid of being overheard.  "Almost off the scope, most times.  Working on that weird contraption of his." 
They don't know why they can't tune Lubin in.  He says they're all dark to him too.  Once, about a month ago, Brander suggested doing an exploratory NMR; Lubin said he'd rather not.  He sounded pleasant enough, but there was something about his tone and Brander hasn't brought the subject up since.
Now Brander points his eyecaps at Clarke, a half-smile on his face.  "I dunno, Len.  Do you want to call him a liar to his face?"
She doesn't answer.
"Oh."  Nakata breaks the silence before it can get too awkward.  "There is something else.  Until our replacement arrives they are sending someone down for, they called it routine evaluation.  That doctor, the one who—you know—" 
"Scanlon." Lenie is careful not to spit out the word.
Nakata nods.
"What the hell for?"  Brander growls.  "It's not enough we're already shorthanded, we've got to sit still while Scanlon has another go at us?"
"It's not like before, they say.  He's just going to observe.  While we work."  Nakata shrugs.  "They say it is completely routine.  No interviews or sessions or anything."
Caraco snorts.   "There better not be.  I'd let them cut out my other lung before I'd take another session with that prick."
"'So, you were repeatedly buggered by a trained Dobermans while your mom charged admission'," Brander recites in a fair imitation of Scanlon's voice. "'And how did that make you feel, exactly?'"
"'Actually I'm more of a mechanic,'" Caraco chimes in.  "Did he give you that line?"
"He seemed nice enough to me," Nakata says hesitantly.
"Well, that's his job:  to seem nice."  Caraco grimaces.  "he's just no fucking good at it."  She looks over at Clarke.  "So what do you think, Len?"
"I think he overplayed the empathy card,"  Clarke says after a moment.
"No, I mean how do we handle this?"
Clarke shrugs, vaguely irritated.  "Why ask me?" 
"He better not get in my way.  Dumpy little turd."  Brander spares a blank look at the ceiling.  "Now why can't they design a smart gel to replace him?"



SCREAM

TRAN/OFFI/210850:2132
This is my second night in Beebe. I've asked the participants not to alter their behavior in my presence, since I'm here to observe routine station operations.  I'm pleased to report that my request is being honored by everyone involved.  This is gratifying insofar as it minimizes "observer effects", but it may present problems given that the rifters do not keep reliable schedules.  This makes it difficult to plan one's time with them, and in fact there's one employee — Ken Lubin — whom I haven't seen since I arrived.  Still.  I have plenty of time.
The rifters tend to be withdrawn and uncommunicative — a layperson might call them sullen — but this is entirely in keeping with the profile.  The Station itself seems to be well-maintained and is operating smoothly, despite a certain disregard for standard protocols.

#
When the lights go out in Beebe Station, you can't hear anything at all.
Yves Scanlon lies on his bunk, not listening.  He does not hear any strange sounds filtering in through the hull.  There is no reedy, spectral keening from the seabed, no faint sound of howling wind because he knows that, down here, no wind is possible.  Imagination, perhaps.  A trick of the brain stem, an auditory hallucination.  He's not the slightest bit superstitious; he's a scientist.  He does not hear the ghost of Karl Acton moaning on the seabed. 
And now, concentrating, he's quite certain he hears nothing at all.
It really doesn't bother him, being stuck in a dead man's quarters.  After all, where else is there?  It's not as though he's going to move in with one of the vampires.  And besides, Acton's been gone for months now.
Scanlon remembers the first time he heard the recording.  Four lousy words:  "We lost Acton.  Sorry."  Then she hung up.  Cold bitch, Clarke.  Scanlon once thought something might happen between her and Acton, it was a jigsaw match from the profiles, but you wouldn't know it from that phone call.
Maybe it's her, he muses.  Maybe it's not Lubin after all, maybe it's Clarke.
"We lost Acton."  So much for eulogy.  And Fischer before Acton, and Everitt over at Linke.  And Singh before Everitt.  And—
And now Yves Scanlon is here, in their place.  Sleeping on their bunk, breathing their air.  Counting the seconds, in darkness and quiet.  In dark—
Jesus Christ, what is—
And quiet.  Everything's quiet.  Nothing's moaning out there.
Nothing at all.

#

TRANS/OFFI/220850:0945
We're all mammals, of course.  We therefore have a Circadian rhythm which calibrates itself to ambient photoperiod.  It's been known for some time that when people are denied photoperiodic cues their rhythms tend to lengthen, usually stabilizing between twenty-seven and thirty-six hours.  Adherence to a regular twenty-four hour work schedule is usually sufficient to keep this from happening, so we didn't expect a problem in the deep stations.  As an added measure I recommended that a normal photoperiod be built into Beebe's lighting systems; the lights are programmed to dim slightly between twenty-two hundred and oh seven hundred every day.
The participants have apparently chosen to ignore these cues.  Even during 'daytime' they keep ambient lighting dimmer than my suggested 'nocturnal' levels.  (They also prefer to leave their eyecaps in at all times, for obvious reasons; although I had not predicted this behavior, it is consistent with the profile.)  Work schedules are somewhat  — flexible, but this is to be expected given that their sleep cycles are always shifting in relation to each other.  Rifters do not wake up in time to perform their duties; they perform their duties whenever two or more of them happen to be awake.  I suspect that they also work alone sometimes, a safety violation, but I have yet to confirm this.
For the moment, these unorthodox behaviors do not appear to be serious.  Necessary work seems to get done on time, even though the station is currently understaffed. However, I believe the situation is potentially problematic.  Efficiency could probably be improved by stricter adherence to a twenty-four hour diel cycle.  Should the GA wish to ensure such adherence, I would recommend proteoglycan therapy for the participants.  Hypothalamic rewiring is another possibility;  it is more invasive, but would be virtually impossible to subvert.  

#
Vampires.  That's a good metaphor.  They avoid the light, and they've taken out all the mirrors.  That could be part of the problem right there.  Scanlon had very sound reasons for recommending mirrors in the first place.
Most of Beebe— all of it, except for his cubby— is too dark for uncapped vision.  Maybe the vampires are trying to conserve energy.  A high priority, sitting here next to eleven thousand megawatts' worth of generating equipment.   Still, these people are all under forty; they probably can't imagine a world without rationed power.
Bullshit.  There's logic, and there's vampire logic.  Don't confuse the two.
For the past two days, leaving his cubby has been like creeping out into some dark alleyway.  He's finally given in and capped his eyes like the rest of them.  Now Beebe's bright enough, but so pale.  Hardly any color at all.  As though the cones have been sucked right out of his eyes.
Clarke and Caraco lean against the ready room bulkhead, watching with their white, white eyes as he checks out his diving armor.  No vampire vivisection for Yves Scanlon, no sirree.  Not for this short a tour.  Preshmesh and acrylic all the way.
He fingers a gauntlet; chain mail, with links the size of pinheads.  He smiles.  "Looks okay."
The vampires just watch and wait.
Come on, Scanlon, you're the mechanic. They're machines like everyone else; they just need more of a tune-up.  You can handle them.
"Very nice tech," he remarks, setting the armor back down.  "Of course, it's not much next to the hardware you folks are packing.  What's it like to be able to turn into a fish at will?"
"Wet," Caraco says, and a moment later looks at Clarke.  Checking for approval, maybe.
Clarke just keeps staring at him.  At least, he thinks she's staring.  It's so damn hard to tell. 
Relax.  She's only trying to psyche you out.  The usual stupid dominance games.
But he knows it's more than that.  Deep down, the rifters just don't like him.
I know what they are. That's why.
Take a dozen children, any children.  Beat and mix thoroughly until some lumps remain.  Simmer for two to three decades; bring to a slow, rolling boil.  Skim off the full-blown psychotics, the schizoaffectives, the multiple personalities, and discard.  (There were doubts about Fischer, actually; but then, who doesn't have an imaginary friend at some point?)
Let cool.  Serve with dopamine garnish.  
What do you get?  Something bent, not broken.  Something that fits into cracks too twisted for the rest of us.
Vampires.
"Well," Scanlon says into the silence.  "Everything checks out.  Can't wait to try it on."  Without waiting for a reply— without exposing himself to the lack of one— he climbs upstairs. At the edge of his vision, Clarke and Caraco exchange looks.  Scanlon glances back, rigorously casual, but any smiles have disappeared by the time he scans their faces. 
Go ahead, ladies.  Indulge yourselves while you can.  The lounge is empty.  Scanlon passes through it and into the corridor.  You've got maybe five years before you're obsolete. His cubby— Acton's cubby— is third on the left.  Five years before all this can run itself without your help.  He opens the hatch; brilliant light spills out, blinding him for a moment while his eyecaps compensate.  Scanlon steps inside, swings the hatch shut.  Sags against it.
Shit.  No locks.
After a while he lies back on his bunk, stares up at a congested ceiling.
Maybe we should have waited after all.  Not let them rush us. If we'd just taken the time to do it right from the start...
But they hadn't had the time.  Total automation at start-up would have delayed the whole program longer than civilized appetites were willing to wait.  And the vampires were already there, after all.  They'd be so much use in the short run, and then they'd be sent home, and they'd be glad to leave this place.  Who wouldn't be?    
The possibility of addiction never even came up.
It seems insane on the face of it.  How could anyone get addicted to a place like this?  What kind of paranoia has seized the GA, that they'd worry about people refusing to leave?  But Yves Scanlon is no mere layperson, he's not fooled by the merely apparent.  He's beyond anthropomorphism.  He's looked into all those undead eyes, up there in his world, down here in theirs, and he knows:  vampires live by different rules.
Maybe they are too happy here.  It's one of two questions Yves Scanlon has set out to answer.  Hopefully they won't figure that out while he's still down here.  They dislike him enough as it is.
It's not their fault, of course.  It's just the way they're programmed.  They can't help hating him, any more than he can help the reverse.

#

Preshmesh is better than surgery.  That's about the most he can say for it.
The pressure jams all those tiny interlocking plates together, and they don't seem to stop clenching until they're a micron away from grinding his body to pulp.  There's a stiffness in the joints.  It's perfectly safe, of course.  Perfectly.  And Scanlon can breathe unpressurised air when he goes outside, and nobody's had to carve out half his chest in the meantime.
He's been out now for about fifteen minutes.  Beebe's just a few meters away.  Clarke and Brander escort him on his maiden voyage, keeping their distance.  Scanlon kicks, rises clumsily from the bottom; the mesh lets him swim like a man with splinted limbs.  Vampires skim the edge of his vision like effortless shadows.
His helmet seems like the center of the universe.  Wherever he looks, an infinite weight of black ocean presses in against the acrylic.  A tiny flaw down by the neck seal catches his eye; he stares, horrified, as a hairline crack grows across his field of vision.
"Help!  Get me in!"  He kicks furiously towards Beebe.
Nobody answers.
"My helmet! My hel—"  The crack isn't just growing now: it's squirming, twitching laterally across the corner of the helmet bubble like— like—
Yellow featureless eyes staring in from the ocean.  A black hand, silhouetted in Beebe's halo, reaching for his face—
"Ahhh—"
A thumb grinds down on the crack in Scanlon's helmet.  The crack smears, bursts; fine gory filaments smudge against the acrylic.  The back half of the hairline peels off and writhes loose into the water, coiling, uncoiling—
Dying.  Scanlon pants with relief.  A worm.  Some stupid fucking roundworm on my faceplate and I thought I was going to die, I thought—
Oh Christ.  I've made a complete fool of myself.
He looks around.  Brander, hanging off his right shoulder, points to the gory remnants sticking to the helmet.  "If it ever really cracked you wouldn't have time to complain.  You'd look just like that."
Scanlon clears his throat.  "Thanks.  Sorry, I—  well, you know I'm new here.  Thanks."
"By the way."
Clarke's voice.  Or what's left of it, after the machinery does its job.  Scanlon flails around until she comes into view overhead.
"How long are you going to be checking up on us?" she asks
Neutral question.  Perfectly reasonable.
In fact, you've got to wonder why nobody asked it before...
"A week at least."  His heart is slowing down again.  "Maybe two.  As long as it takes to make sure things are running smoothly."
She's silent for a second.  Then:   "You're lying."  It doesn't sound like an accusation, somehow; just a simple observation.  Maybe it's the vocoder.
"Why do you say that?"
She doesn't answer.  Something else does; not quite a moan, not quite a voice.  Not quite faint enough to ignore.
Scanlon feels the abyss trickling down his back.  "Did you hear that?"
Clarke slips down past him to the seabed, rotating to keep him in view.  "Hear?  What?"
"It was— " Scanlon listens.  A faint tectonic rumble.  That's all.  "Nothing."
She pushes off the bottom at an angle, slides up through the water to Brander.  "We're on shift," she buzzes at Scanlon.  "You know how the 'lock works."
The vampires vanish into the night.
Beebe shines invitingly.  Alone and suddenly nervous, Scanlon retreats to the airlock.
 But I wasn't lying. I wasn't.  He hasn't had to, yet.  Nobody's asked the right questions.
Still.  It seems odd that he has to remind himself.

#

TRANS/OFFI/230850:0830
I'm about to embark on my first extended dive.  Apparently, the participants have been asked to catch a fish for one of the Pharm consortiums.  Washington/Rand, I believe.  I find this a bit puzzling— usually Pharms are only interested in bacteria, and they use their own people for collecting— but it provides the participants with a change from the usual routine, and it provides me an opportunity to watch them in action.  I expect to learn a great deal.

#
Brander is slouched at the library when Scanlon comes through the lounge.  His fingers rest unmoving on the keypad.  Eyephones hang unused in their hooks.  Brander's empty eyes point at the flatscreen.  The screen is dark.
Scanlon hesitates.  "I'm heading out now.  With Clarke and Caraco."
Brander's shoulders rise and fall, almost indiscernibly.  A sigh, perhaps.  A shrug.
"The others are at the Throat.  You'll be the only— I mean, will you be running tender from Comm?"
"You told us not to change the routine," Brander says, not looking up.
"That's true, Michael.  But—"
Brander stands.  "So make up your mind."  He disappears down the corridor.  Scanlon watches him go.  Naturally this has to go into my report.  Not that you care.
You might, though.  Soon enough.
Scanlon drops into the wet room and finds it empty.  He struggles into his armor single-handed, taking an extra few moments to ensure that the helmet bubble is spotless.  He catches up with Clarke and Caraco just outside; Clarke is checking out a quartet of squids hovering over the seabed.  One of them is tethered to a specimen canister resting on the bottom, a pressure-proof coffin over two meters long.  Caraco sets it for neutral buoyancy; it rises a few centimeters.
They set off without a word.  The squids tow them into the abyss; the women in the lead, Scanlon and the canister following behind.  Scanlon looks back over his shoulder.  Beebe's comforting lights wash down from yellow to gray, then disappear entirely.  Feeling a sudden need for reassurance, he trips through the channels on his acoustic modem.  There:  the homing beacon.  You're never really lost down here as long as you can hear that.
Clarke and Caraco are running dark.  Not even their squids are shining.
Don't say anything.  You don't want them to change their routine, remember?
Not that they would anyway.
Occasional dim lights flash briefly at the corner of his eye, but they always vanish when he looks at them.  After an endless few minutes a bright smear fades into view directly ahead, resolves into a collection of copper beacons and dark angular skyscrapers.  The vampires avoid the light, head around it at an angle.  Scanlon and cargo follow helplessly.
They set up just off the Throat, at the borderline between light and dark.  Caraco unlatches the canister as Clarke rises into the column above them; she's got something in her right hand, but Scanlon can't see what it is.  She holds it up as though displaying it to an invisible crowd.
It gibbers.
It sounds like a very loud mosquito at first.  Then it dopplers down to a low growl, slides back up into erratic high frequency.
And now, finally, Lenie Clarke turns her headlight on.
She hangs up there like some crucified ascendant, her hand whining at the abyss, the light from her head sweeping the water like, like—
—a dinner bell, Scanlon realizes as something charges out of the darkness at her, almost as big as she is and Jesus the teeth on it—
It swallows her leg up to the crotch.  Lenie Clarke takes it all in stride.  She jabs down with a billy that's magically appeared in her left hand.  The creature bloats and bursts in a couple of places; clumps of bubbles erupt like silvery mushrooms through flesh, shudder off into the sky.  The creature thrashes, its gullet a monstrous scabbard around Clarke's leg.  The vampire reaches down and dismembers it with her bare hands.
Caraco, still fiddling with the canister, looks up.  "Hey, Len.  They wanted it intact."
"Wrong kind," Clarke buzzes.  The water around her is full of torn flesh and flashing scavengers.  Clarke ignores them, turning slowly, scanning the abyss.
Caraco:  "Behind you; four o'clock."
"Got it," Clarke says, spinning to a new bearing. 
Nothing happens.  The shredded carcass, still twitching, drifts toward the bottom, scavengers sparkling on all sides.  Clarke's hand-held voicebox gurgles and whines.
How— Scanlon moves his tongue in his mouth, ready to ask aloud.
"Not now," Caraco buzzes at him, before he can.
There's nothing there.  What are they keying on?
It comes in fast, unswerving, from the precise direction Lenie Clarke is facing.  "That'll do," she says.
A muffled explosion to Scanlon's left.  A thin contrail of bubbles streaks from Caraco to monster, connecting the two in an instant.  The thing jerks at a sudden impact.  Clarke slips to one side as it thrashes past, Caraco's dart embedded in its flank.
Clarke's headlight goes out, her voicebox falls silent.  Caraco stows the dart gun and swims up to join her.  The two women maneuver their quarry down towards the canister.  It snaps at them, weak and spastic.  They push it down into the coffin, seal the top.
"Like shooting fish for a barrel," Caraco buzzes.
"How did you know it was coming?"  Scanlon asks.
"They always come,"  Caraco says.  "The sound fools them.  And the light."
"I mean, how did you know which direction?  In advance?"
A moment's silence.
"You just get a feel for it after a while," Clarke says finally.
"That," Caraco adds, "and this."  She holds up a sonar pistol, tucks it back under her belt.
The convoy reforms.  There's a prescribed drop-off point for monsters, a hundred meters away from the Throat.  (The GA has never been keen on letting outsiders wander too far into its home turf.)  Once again the vampires leave light for darkness, Scanlon in tow.  They travel through a world utterly without form, save for the scrolling circle of mud in his headlight.  Suddenly Clarke turns to Caraco.
"I'll go," she buzzes, and peels away into the void.
Scanlon throttles his squid, edges up beside Caraco.
"Where's she off to?"
"Here we are," Caraco says.  They coast to a halt.  Caraco fins back to the droned squid and touches a control; buckles disengage, straps retract.  The canister floats free.  Caraco cranks down the buoyancy and it settles down on a clump of tubeworms.
"Len— uh, Clarke," Scanlon prods.
"They need an extra hand back at the Throat.  She went to help out."
Scanlon checks his modem channel.  Of course it's the right one, if it wasn't he wouldn't be able to hear Caraco.  Which means that Clarke and the vampires at the Throat must have been using a different frequency.  Another safety violation.
But he's not a fool, he knows the story.  They've only switched channels because he's here.  They're just trying to keep him out of the loop.
Par for the course.  First the fucking GA, now the hired help—
A sound, from behind.  A faint electrical whine.  The sound of a squid starting up.
Scanlon turns around.  "Caraco?"
His headlamp sweeps across canister, squid, seabed, water.
"Caraco?  You there?"
Canister.  Squid.  Mud.
"Hello?"
Empty water.
"Hey!  Caraco!  What the hell—"
A faint thumping, very close by.
He tries to look everywhere at once. One leg presses against the coffin.
The coffin is rocking.
He lays his helmet against its surface.  Yes.  Something inside, muffled, wet.  Thumping.  Trying to get out.  
It can't.  No way.  It's just dying in there, that's all.  
He pushes away, drifts up into the water column.  He feels very exposed.  A few stiff-legged kicks take him back to the bottom.  Slightly better.
"Caraco?  Come on, Judy—"
Oh Jesus.  She left me here.  She just fucking left me out here.
He hears something moaning, very close by.
Inside his helmet, in fact.

#

TRANS/OFFI/230850:2026
I accompanied Judy Caraco and Lenie Clarke outside today, and witnessed several events that concern me.   Both participants swam through unlit areas without headlamps and spent significant periods of time isolated from dive buddies; at one point, Caraco simply left me on the seabed without warning.  This is potentially life-threatening behavior, although of course I was able to find my way back to Beebe using the homing beacon.
I have yet to receive an explanation for all this.  The v— the other personnel are presently gone from the station.  I can find two or three of them on sonar; I suppose the rest are just hidden in the bottom clutter.  Once again, this is extremely unsafe behavior.
Such recklessness appears to be typical here. It implies a relative indifference to personal welfare, an attitude entirely consistent with the profile I developed at the onset of the rifter program.  (The only alternative is that they simply do not appreciate the dangers involved in this environment, which is unlikely.)
It is also consistent with a generalized post-traumatic addiction to hostile environments.  This doesn't constitute evidence per sé, of course, but I have noted one or two other things which, taken together, may be cause for concern.  Michael Brander, for example, has a history which ranges from caffeine and sympathomimetic abuse to limbic hot-wiring.  He's known to have brought a substantial supply of phencyclidine derms with him to Beebe;  I've just located it in his cubby and I was surprised to find that it has barely been touched.  Phencyclidine is not, physiologically speaking, addictive— exogenous-drug addicts are screened out of the program— but the fact remains that Brander had a habit when he came down here, a habit which he has since abandoned.  I have to wonder what he's replaced it with.

#

The wet room.
"There you are.  Where did you go?"
"Had to recover this cartridge.  Bad sulfide head."
"You could have told me.  I was supposed to come along on your rounds anyway, remember?  You just left me out there."
"You got back."
"That's— that's not the point, Judy.  You don't leave someone alone at the bottom of the ocean without a word.  What if something had happened to me?"
"We go out alone all the time.  It's part of the job.  Watch that, it's slippery."
"Safety procedures are also part of the job.  Even for you.  And especially for me, Judy, I'm a complete fish out of water here, heh heh.  You can't expect me to know my way around."
"...."
"Excuse me?"
"We're short-handed, remember?  We can't always afford to buddy up.  And you're a big strong man— well, you're a man, anyway.  I didn't think you needed baby-sit—"
"Shit!  My hand!"
"I told you to be careful."
"Ow. How much does the fucking thing weigh?"
"About ten kilos, without all the mud. I guess I should've rinsed it off."
"I guess so.  I think one of the heads gouged me on the way down.  Shit, I'm bleeding."
"Sorry about that."
"Yeah.  Well, look, Caraco.  I'm sorry if baby-sitting rubs you the wrong way, but a little more baby-sitting and Acton and Fischer might still be alive, you know?  A little more baby-sitting and— did you hear that?"
"What?"
"From outside.  That— moaning, sort of—"
...
"Come on, C— Judy.  You must've heard it!"
"Maybe the hull shifted."
"No.  I heard something.  And this isn't the first time, either."
"I didn't hear anything."
"You d— where are you going?  You just came in!  Judy..."
Clank. Hiss.
"...don't go..."

#

TRANS/OFFI/250850:2120
I've asked each of the participants to submit to a routine sweep under the medical scanner— or rather, I've asked most of them directly, and asked them to pass the word on to Ken Lubin, whom I've seen a few times now but haven't actually spoken to yet.  (I have twice attempted to engage Mr. Lubin in conversation, without success.)   The participants know, of course, that medical scans do not require physical contact on my part, and they're well able to run them at their own convenience without me even being present.  Still, although no one has explicitly refused my request, there has been a notable lack of enthusiasm in terms of actual compliance.  It's fairly obvious (and entirely consistent with my profile) that they consider it something of an intrusion, and will avoid it if possible.  To date I've managed to get rundowns on only Alice Nakata and Judy Caraco.  I've appended their binaries to this entry; both show elevated production of dopamine and norepinephrine, but I can't establish whether this began before or after their present tour of duty.   GABA and other inhibitor levels were slightly up, too, left over from their previous dive (less than an hour before the scan).  
The others, so far, haven't been able to "find the time" for an exam.  In the meantime I've resorted to going over stored scanner records of old injuries.  Not surprisingly, physical injuries are common down here, although they've become much less frequent as of late.  There are no cases of head trauma on record, however— at least, nothing that would warrant an NMR.  This effectively limits my brain chemistry data to what the participants are willing to provide on request— not much, so far.  If this doesn't change, the bulk of my analysis will have to be based on behavioral observations.  As medieval as that sounds.

#
Who could it be?  Who?
When Yves Scanlon first sank into the abyss he had two questions on his mind.  He's chasing the second one now, lying in his cubby,  shielded from Beebe by a pair of eyephones and the personal database in his shirt pocket.  For now, he's gone mercifully blind to plumbing and condensation.  
He's not deaf, though.  Unfortunately.  Every now and then he hears footsteps, or low voices, or— just maybe— the distant cry of something unimaginable in pain; but then he speaks a little louder into the pickup, drowns unwelcome sounds with barked commands to scroll up, link files, search for keywords.  Personnel records dance across the inside of his eyes, and he can almost forget where he is.
His interest in this particular question has not been sanctioned by his employers.  They know about it, though, yes sirree they know.  They just don't think I do.
Rowan and her cronies are such assholes.  They've been lying to him from the start.  Scanlon doesn't know why.  He'd have been okay with it, if they'd just leveled with him.  But they kept it under wraps.  As though he wouldn't be able to figure it out for himself.
It's bloody obvious.  There's more than one way to make a vampire. Usually you take someone who's fucked in the head, and you train them.   But why couldn't you take someone who's already trained, and then fuck them in the head?  It might even be cheaper.
You can learn a lot from a witch hunt.  All that repressed-memory hysteria back in the nineties, for example:  so many people suddenly remembering abuse, or alien abduction, or dear old grandma stirring a cauldron of stewed babies.  It didn't take much, no one had to go in and physically rewire the synapses; the brain's gullible enough to rewire itself if you coax it.  Most of those poor bozos didn't even know they were doing it.  These days it only takes a few weeks worth of hypnotherapy.  The right suggestions, delivered just the right way, can inspire memories to build themselves out of bits and pieces.  Sort of a neurological cascade effect.  And once you think you've been abused, well, why wouldn't your psyche shift to match?
It's a good idea.  Someone else thought so too, at least that's what Scanlon heard from Mezzich a couple of weeks ago.  Nothing official, of course, but there may already be a few prototypes in the system.  Someone right here in Beebe, maybe, a walking testament to Induced False Memory Syndrome.  Maybe Lubin.  Maybe Clarke.  Could be anyone, really.
They should have told me.
They told him, all right.  They told him,  when he first started, that he was coming in on the ground floor.  You'll have input on pretty much everything, was what Rowan had promised.  The design work, the follow-ups.  They even offered him automatic coauthorship on all unclassified publications.  Yves Scanlon was supposed to be a fucking equal.  And then they shut him off in a little room, mumbling to recruits while they made all the decisions up on the thirty-fifth fucking floor.
Standard corporate mentality.  Knowledge was power.  Corpses never told anybody anything.
I was an idiot to believe them as long as I did.  Sending up my recommendations, waiting for them to honor a promise or two.  And this is the bone they throw me.  Stick me at the bottom of the fucking ocean with these post-traumatic head cases because no one else wants to get shit on their hands.
I mean, fuck.  I'm so far out of the loop I have to coax rumors from a has-been hack like Mezzich?
Still.  He wonders who it might be.  Brander or Nakata, maybe.  Her record shows a background in geothermal engineering and high-pressure tech, and he's got a Masters in systems ecology with a minor in genomics.   Too much education for your average vampire.  Assuming there is such a thing.
Wait a second.  Why should I trust these files?  After all, if Rowan's keeping this thing under wraps she might not be stupid enough to leave clues lying around in the GA personnel records.  
Scanlon ponders the question.  Suppose the files have been modified.  Maybe he should check out the least likely candidates.  He orders an ascending sort by educational background.
Lenie Clarke.  Premed dropout, basic virtual-tech ed.  The GA hired her away from the Hongcouver Aquarium.  PR department.
Hmm.  Someone with Lenie Clarke's social skills, in public relations?  Not likely.  I wonder if—
Jesus.  There it is again.
Yves Scanlon strips the phones from his eyes and stares at the ceiling.  The sound seeps in through the hull, barely audible.
I'm almost getting used to it, actually.
It sighs through the bulkhead, recedes, dies.  Scanlon waits.  He realizes he's holding his breath.
There.  Something very far away. Something very—
Lonely.  It sounds so lonely.
He knows how it feels.

#

The lounge is empty, but something casts a faint shadow through the Communications hatchway.  A soft voice from inside:  Clarke, it sounds like.  Scanlon evesdrops for a few seconds.  She's reciting supply consumption rates, listing the latest bits of equipment to break down.  A routine call up to the GA, from the sound of it.  She hangs up just before he steps into view. 
She's sitting slumped in her chair, a cup of coffee within easy reach.  
    They eye each other for a moment, without speaking.
"Anyone else around?" Scanlon wonders.
She shakes her head.
"I thought I heard something, a few minutes ago."
She turns back to face the console.  A couple of icons flash on the main display.
"What are you doing?"
She makes a vague gesture to the console.  "Running tender.  Thought you'd like that, for a change."
"Oh, but I said—"
"Not to change the routine," Clarke cuts in.  She seems tired.  "Do you always expect everyone to do everything you say?" 
"Is that what you think I meant?"
She snorts softly, still not looking back.
"Look," Scanlon says, "Are you sure you didn't hear something, like— like—" like  a ghost, Clarke?  A sound like poor dead Acton might make, watching his own remains rotting out there on the rift?
"Don't worry about it," she says.
Aha.  "So you did hear something."  She knows what it is, too.  They all do.
"What I hear," she says, "is my own concern."
Take a hint, Scanlon.  But there's nowhere else to go, except back to his cubby.  And the prospect of being alone, right now— somehow, even the company of a vampire seems preferable.
She turns around to face him again.  "Something else?"
"Not really.  Just can't seem to sleep."  Scanlon dons a disarming smile.  "Just not used to the pressure, I guess."  That's right.  Put her at ease.  Acknowledge her superiority.  
She just stares at him
"I don't know how you take it, month after month," he adds.
"Yes you do.  You're a psychiatrist.  You chose us."
"Actually, I'm more of a mechanic." 
"Of course,"  she says, expressionless.  "It's your job to keep things broken."
Scanlon looks away.
She stands up and takes a step towards the hatchway, her tending duties apparently forgotten.  Scanlon stands aside.  She brushes past, somehow avoiding physical contact in the cramped space.
"Look," he blurts out, "how about a quick review of the tending procedure?  I'm not all that familiar with this equipment." 
It's too obvious.   He knows she sees through it before the words are even out of his mouth.  But it's also a perfectly reasonable request from someone in his role.  Routine evaluation, after all.
She watches him for a moment, her head cocked a bit to one side.  Her face, expressionless as usual, somehow conveys the impression of a slight smile.  Finally she sits down again.
She taps on a menu.  "This is the Throat."  A cluster of luminous rectangles nested in  a background of contour lines.  "Thermal readout."  The image erupts into psychedelic false color, red and yellow hot spots pulsing at irregular intervals along the main fissure.  "You don't usually bother with thermal when you're tending," Clarke explains.  "When you're out there you find that stuff out sooner first-hand anyway."  The psychedelia fades back to green and gray.
And what happens if someone gets taken by surprise out there and you don't have the readings in here to know they're in trouble?  Scanlon doesn't ask aloud.  Just another cut corner.
Clarke pans, finds a pair of alphanumeric icons.  "Alice and Ken."  Another red hot-spot slides into view in the upper left corner of the display.
No, wait a minute; she turned thermal off...
"Hey," Scanlon says, "that's a deadman switch—"
No audio alarm.  Why isn't there an alarm—  His eyes dart across the half-familiar console.  Where is it, where—shit—
The alarm's been disabled.
"Look!" Scanlon points at the display.  "Can't you—"
Clarke looks up at him, almost lazily.  She doesn't seem to understand.
He jabs his thumb down.  "Somebody just died out there!"
She looks at the screen, slowly shakes her head.  "No—"
"You stupid bitch, you cut off the alarm!"  
He hits a control icon.  The station starts howling.  Scanlon jumps back, startled, bumps the bulkhead.  Clarke watches him, frowning slightly.
 "What's wrong with you?" He reaches out and grabs her by the shoulders.  "Do something!  Call Lubin, call—"  The alarm is deafening.  He shakes her, hard, pulls her up out of the chair—  
And remembers, too late:  you don't touch Lenie Clarke.
Something happens in her face.  It almost crumples, right there in front of him.  Lenie Clarke the ice queen is suddenly nowhere to be seen.  In her place there's only a beaten, blind little kid, body shaking, mouth moving in the same pattern over and over, he can't hear over the alarm but her lips shape the words,  I'm sorry I'm sorry I'm sorry—
All in the few scant seconds before she crystallizes.
She seems to harden against the sound, against Scanlon's assault.  Her face goes completely blank.  She rises out of the chair, centimeters taller than she should be.  One hand comes up, grabs Yves Scanlon by the throat.  Pushes.
He staggers backwards into the lounge, flailing.  The table appears to one side; he reaches out, steadies himself. 
Suddenly, Beebe falls silent again.
Scanlon takes a deep breath.  Another vampire has appeared in his peripheral vision, standing impassively at the mouth of the corridor; he ignores it.  Directly ahead, Lenie Clarke is sitting down again in Communications, her back turned.  Scanlon steps forward.
"It's Karl," she says before he can speak.
It takes a moment to register:  Acton.
"But— that was months ago," Scanlon says.  "You lost him."
"We lost him."  She breathes, slowly.  "He went down a smoker.  It erupted."
"I'm sorry,"  Scanlon says.  "I— didn't know."
"Yeah."  Her voice is tight with controlled indifference.  "He's too far down to—  we can't get him back.  Too dangerous."  She turns to face him, impossibly calm.  "Deadman switch still works, though.  It'll keep screaming until the battery runs down."  She shrugs.  "So we keep the alarm off."
"I don't blame you,"  Scanlon says softly.
"Imagine," Clarke tells him, "how much your approval comforts me." 
He turns to leave.
"Wait," she says.  "I can zoom in for you.  I can show you exactly where he died, maximum res."
"That's not necessary."
She stabs controls.  "No problem.  Naturally you're interested.  What kind of mechanic wouldn't want to know the performance specs on his own creation?"  She reshapes the display like a sculptor, hones it down and down until there's nothing left but a tangle of faint green lines and a red pulsing dot.
"He got wedged into an ancillary crevice," she says.  "Looks like a tight fit even now, when all the flesh has been boiled away.  Don't know how he managed to get down there when he was all in one piece."  There's no stress in her voice at all.  She could be talking about a friend's vacation.
Scanlon can feel her eyes on him; he keeps his on the screen.
"Fischer," he says.  "What happened to him?"
From the corner of his eye:  she starts to tense, turns it into a shrug.  "Who knows?  Maybe Archie got him."
"Archie?"
"Archie Toothis."  Scanlon doesn't recognize the name; it's not in any of his files, as far as he knows.  He considers, decides not to push it.
"Did Fischer's deadman go off, at least?"
"He didn't have one."  She shrugs.   "The abyss can kill you any number of ways, Scanlon.  It doesn't always leave traces."
"I'm— I'm sorry if I upset you, Lenie."
One corner of her mouth barely twitches.
And he is sorry.  Even though it's not his fault.  I didn't make you what you are, he wants to say.  I didn't smash you  into junk, that was someone else.  I just came along afterwards and found a use for you.  I gave you a purpose, more of a purpose than you ever had back there.
Is that really so bad?  
He doesn't dare ask aloud, so he turns to leave.  And when Lenie Clarke lays one finger, very briefly, on the screen where Acton's icon flashes, he pretends not to notice.

#

TRANS/OFFI/260850:1352
I recently had an interesting conversation with Lenie Clarke.  Although she didn't admit so openly— she is very well defended, and quite expert at hiding her feelings from laypeople— I believe that she and Karl Acton were sexually involved.  This is a heartening discovery, insofar as my original profiles strongly suggested that such a relationship would develop.  (Clarke has a history of relationships with Intermittent Explosives.)  This adds a measure of empirical confidence to other, related predictions regarding rifter behavior.
I have also learned that Karl Acton, rather than simply disappearing, was actually killed by an erupting smoker.  I don't know what he was doing down there— I'll continue to investigate— but the behavior itself seems foolish at best and quite possibly suicidal.   Suicide is not consistent either with Karl Acton's DSM or ECM profiles, which must have been accurate when first derived.  Suicide, therefore, would imply a degree of basic personality change.  This is consistent with the trauma-addiction scenario.  However, some sort of physical brain injury can not be ruled out.  My search of the medical logs didn't turn up any head injuries, but was limited to living participants.  Perhaps Acton was... different...
Oh.  I found out who Archie Toothis is.  Not in the personnel files at all.  The library.  Architeuthis:  giant squid.
I think she was kidding.




BULRUSHES
At times like this it seems as if the world has always been black.
It hasn't, of course.  Joel Kita caught a hint of ambient blue out the dorsal port just ten minutes ago.  Right before they dropped through the deep scattering layer; pretty thin stuff compared to the old days, he's been told, but still impressive.  Glowing siphonophores and flashlight fish and all.  Still beautiful.
That's a thousand meters above them now.  Right here there's nothing but  the thin vertical slash of Beebe's transponder line.  Joel has put the 'scaphe into a lazy spin during the drop, forward floods sweeping the water in a descending corkscrew.  The transponder line swings past the main viewport every thirty seconds or so, keeping time, a bright vertical line against the dark.
Other than that, blackness.
A tiny monster bumps the port.  Needle teeth so long the mouth can't close, an eel-like body studded with glowing photophores— fifteen, twenty centimeters long, tops.  It's not even big enough to make a sound when it hits and then it's gone, spinning away above them.
"Viperfish," Jarvis says.
Joel glances around at his passenger, hunched up beside him to take advantage of what might laughingly be called "the view".  Jarvis is some sort of cellular physiologist out of  Rand/Washington U., here to collect a mysterious package in a plain brown wrapper.
"See many of those?"  he asks now.
Joel shakes his head.  "Not this far down.  Kind of unusual."
"Yeah, well, this whole area is unusual.  That's why I'm here."
Joel checks tactical, nudges a trim tab.
"Now viperfish, they're not supposed to get any bigger than the one you just saw," Jarvis remarks.  "But there was a guy, oh, back in the 1930s— Beebe his name was, the same guy they named— anyway, he swore he saw one that was over two meters long."
Joel grunts.  "Didn't know people came down here back then."
"Yeah, well, they were just starting out.  And everyone had always thought deepwater fish were these puny little midgets, because that's all they ever brought up in their trawls.  But then Beebe sees this big ripping viperfish, and people start thinking hey, maybe we only caught little ones because all the big ones could outswim the trawls.  Maybe the deep sea really is teeming with giant monsters."
"It's not,"  Joel says.  "At least, not that I've seen."
"Yeah, well, that's what most people think.  Every now and then you get pieces of something weird washing up, though.  And of course there's Megamouth.  And your garden-variety giant squid."
"They never get down this far.  I bet none of your other giants do either.  Not enough food."
"Except for the vents," Jarvis says.
"Except for the vents."
"Actually," Jarvis amends, "except for this vent."
The transponder line swings past, a silent metronome. 
"Yeah," says Joel after a moment.  "Why is that?"
"Well, we're not sure.  We're working on it, though.  That's what I'm doing here.  Gonna bag one of those scaly mothers."
"You're kidding.  We going to butt it to death with the hull?"
"Actually, it's already been bagged.  The rifters got it for us a couple of days ago.  All we do is pick it up."
"I could do that solo.  Why'd you come along?"
"Got to check to make sure they did it right.  Don't want the canister blowing up on the surface."
"And that extra tank you strapped onto my 'scaphe?  The one with the biohazard stickers all over it?"
"Oh," Jarvis says.  "That's just to sterilize the sample."
"Uh huh."  Joel lets his eyes run over the panels.  "You must pull a lot of weight back on shore."
"Oh?  Why's that?"
"I used to make the Channer run a lot.  Pharmaceutical dives, supply trips to Beebe, ecotourism.   A while back I shuttled some corpse type out to Beebe; he  said he was staying for a month or so.  The GA calls me three days later and tells me to go pick him up.  I show up for the run and they tell me it's cancelled.   No explanation."
    "Pretty strange," Jarvis remarks.
    "You're the first run I've had to Channer in six weeks.  You're the first run anyone's had, from what I can tell.  So, you pull some  weight."
"Not really." Jarvis shrugs in the half-light.  "I'm just a research associate.  I go where they tell me, just like you.  Today they told me to go and pick up an order of fish to go." 
Joel looks at him.
"You were asking why they got so big," Jarvis says, deking to the right.  "We figure it's some kind of endosymbiotic infection."
"No shit."
"Say it's easier for some microbe to live inside a fish than out in the ocean — less osmotic stress — so once inside it's pumping out more ATP than it needs."
"ATP," Joel says.
"High-energy phosphate compound.  Cellular battery.  Anyway, it spits out this surplus ATP, and the host fish can use it as extra growth energy.  So maybe Channer Vent's got some sort of unique bug that infects teleost fishes and gives 'em a growth spurt."
"Pretty weird."
"Actually, happens all the time.  Every one of your own cells is a colony, for that matter.  You know, nucleus, mitochondria, chloroplasts if you're a plant—"
"I'm not."  More than I can say for some folks... 
"—those all used to be free-living microbes in their own right.  A few billion years ago something ate them, but it couldn't digest them properly so they all just kept living inside the cytoplasm.  Eventually they struck up a deal with the host cell, took over housecleaning tasks and suchlike in lieu of rent.  Voila: your modern eukaryotic cell."
    "So what happens if this Channer bug gets into a person?  We all grow three meters high?"
A polite laugh.  "Nope.  People stop growing when they reach adulthood.  So do most vertebrates, actually.  Fish, on the other hand, keep growing their whole lives.  And deepwater fish—those don't do anything except grow, if you know what I mean."
Joel raises his eyebrows.
    Jarvis holds up his hands.  "I know, I know.  Your baby finger is bigger than your average deepsea fish.  But that just means they're short of fuel; when they do gas up, believe me, they use it for growth.  Why waste calories just swimming around when you can't see anything anyway?  In dark environments it makes more sense for predators to sit-and-wait.   Whereas if you grow big enough, maybe you'll get too big for other predators, you see?"
"Mmm."
"Of course, we're basing the whole theory on a couple of samples that got dragged up without any protection against temperature or pressure changes."  Jarvis snorts.  "Might as well have sent them in a paper bag.  But this time we're doing it right— hey, is that light I see down there?"
There's a vague yellow glow smudging the darkness directly below.  Joel calls up a topographic display:  Beebe.  The geothermal array over at the rift proper lays out a sequence of hard green echoes bearing 340°.  And just to the left of that, about a hundred meters off the east-most generator, something squirts a unique acoustic signature at four-second intervals.
Joel taps commands to the dive planes.  The 'scaphe pulls out of its spiral and coasts off to the northeast.  Beebe Station, never more than a bright stain, fades to stern.
The ocean floor resolves suddenly in the 'scaphe's headlights; bone-gray ooze slides past, occasional outcroppings, great squashed marshmallows of lava and pumice.  In the cockpit a flashing point of light slo-mo's towards the center of the topographic display.
Something charges them from overhead; the dull wet sound of its impact reverberates briefly through the hull.  Joel looks up through the dorsal port but sees nothing.  Several more impacts, staggered.  The 'scaphe whirs implacably onward.
"There."
It looks almost like a lifeboat canister, three meters long.  Readouts twinkle from a panel on one rounded end.  It's resting on a carpet of giant tubeworms, their feathery crowns extended in full filter-feeding mode.  Joel thinks of the baby Moses, nestled in a clump of mutant bulrushes. 
"Wait a second," Jarvis says.  "Kill the lights first."
"What for?"
"You don't need them, do you?"
"Well, no.  I can use instruments if I have to.  But why—"
"Just do it, okay?"  Jarvis, the chatterbox, is suddenly all business.
Darkness floods the cockpit, retreats a bit before the glow of the readouts.  Joel grabs a pair of eyephones off a hook to his left.  The sea floor reappears before him courtesy of the ventral photoamps, faded to blue and black.
He coaxes the 'scaphe into position directly above the canister, listens to the clank and creak of grapples flexing beneath the deck;  metal claws the color of slate extend across his field of view.
"Spray it before you pick it up,"  Jarvis says.
Joel reaches out and taps the control codes without looking.  The 'phones show him a nozzle extending from Jarvis's tank, taking aim like a skinny cobra.
"Do it."
 The nozzle ejaculates gray-blue murk, sprays back and forth along the length of the canister, sweeping the benthos on either side.  The tubeworms yank back into their tunnels and shut the doors; the whole featherduster forest vanishes in an instant, leaving a crowd of sealed leathery tubes.
The nozzle spews its venom.
One of the tubes opens, almost hesitantly.  Something dark and stringy drifts out, twitching.  The gray plume sweeps across it; it sags, lifeless, across the sill of its burrow.    Other tubes are opening now.  Invertebrate corpses slump back into sight.
"What's in this stuff?"  Joel whispers.
"Cyanide.  Rotenone.  Some other things.  Sort of a cocktail."
The nozzle sputters for a few seconds and runs dry.  Automatically, Joel retracts it.
"Okay," Jarvis says.  "Let's grab it and go home."
Joel doesn't move.
"Hey,"  Jarvis says.
Joel shakes his head, plays the machinery.  The 'scaphe extends its arms in a metal hug, pulls the canister off the bottom.  Joel strips the 'phones from his eyes and taps the controls.  They begin rising.  
"That was a pretty thorough rinse," Joel remarks after a while.
"Yes. Well, the sample's costing us a fair bit.  Don't want to contaminate it."
"I see."
"You can turn the lights back on," Jarvis says.  "How long before we break the surface?"
Joel trips the floods.  "Twenty minutes.  Half hour."
"I hope the lifter pilot doesn't get too bored."  Jarvis is all chummy again.
"There is no pilot.  It's a smart gel."
"Really?  You don't say."  Jarvis frowns.  "Those are scary things, those gels.  You know one suffocated a bunch of people in London a while back?"  
Yes, Joel's about to say, but Jarvis is back in spew mode.  "No shit.  It was running the subway system over there, perfect operational record, and then one day it just forgets to crank up the ventilators when it's supposed to.  Train slides into station fifteen meters underground, everybody gets out, no air, boom."
Joel's heard this before.  The punchline's got something to do with a broken clock, if he remembers it right. 
"These things teach themselves from experience, right?," Jarvis continues.  "So everyone just assumed it had learned to cue the ventilators on something obvious.  Body heat, motion, CO2 levels, you know.  Turns out instead it was watching a clock on the wall.  Train arrival correlated with a predictable subset of patterns on the digital display, so it started the fans whenever it saw one of those patterns."
"Yeah.  That's right."  Joel shakes his head.  "And vandals had smashed the clock, or something."
"Hey.  You did hear about it."
"Jarvis, that story's ten years old if it's a day.   That was way back when they were starting out with these things.  Those gels have been debugged from the molecules up since then."
"Yeah?  What makes you so sure?"
"Because a gel's been running the lifter for the better part of a year now, and it's had plenty of opportunity to fuck up.  It hasn't."
"So you like these things?"
"Fuck no," Joel says, thinking about Ray Stericker.  Thinking about himself.  "I'd like 'em a lot better if they did screw up sometimes, you know?"
"Well,  I don't like 'em or trust 'em.  You've got to wonder what they're up to."
Joel nods, distracted by Jarvis' digression.  But then his mind returns to dead tube worms, and undeclared no-dive zones, and an anonymous canister drenched with enough poison to kill a fucking city.
I've got to wonder what all of us are.



GHOSTS
It's hideous.
Nearly a meter across.  Probably smaller when Clarke started working on it, but it's a real monster now.  Scanlon thinks back to his v-school days, and remembers:  starfish are supposed to be all in one plane.  Flat disks with arms.  Not this one.  Clarke has grafted bits and pieces together at all angles and produced a crawling Gordian knot, some pieces red, some purple, some white.  Scanlon thinks the original body may have been orange, before.
"They regenerate," she buzzes at his shoulder.  "And they've got really primitive immune systems, so there's no tissue rejection problems to speak of.  It makes them easier to fix if something goes wrong with them."
Fix.  As if this is actually some sort of improvement.  "So, it was broken?" Scanlon asks.  "What was wrong with it, exactly?"
"It was scratched.  It had this cut on its back.  And there was another starfish nearby, all torn up.  Way too far gone for even me to help, but I figured I could use some of the pieces to patch this little guy together."
This little guy.  This little guy drags itself around between them in slow pathetic circles, leaving tangled tracks in the mud.  Filaments of parasitic fungus trail from ragged seams, not quite healed.  Extra limbs, asymmetrically grafted, catch on rocks; the body lurches, perpetually unstable.
Lenie Clarke doesn't seem to notice.
"How long ago— I mean, how long have you been doing this?"  
Scanlon's voice is admirably level; he's certain it conveys nothing but friendly interest.  But somehow she knows.  She’s silent for a second, and then she points her undead eyes at him  and she says, “Of course.  It makes you sick.”
“No, I’m just— well, fascinated, I—”
"You're disgusted," she buzzes.  "You shouldn't be.  Isn't this exactly the sort of thing you'd expect from a rifter?  Isn't that why you sent us down here in the first place?"
“I know what you think, Lenie,”  Scanlon tries, going for the light touch.  "You think we get up every morning and ask ourselves, How can we best fuck over our employees today?" 
She looks down at the starfish.  "We?"
"The GA.”
She floats there while her pet monster squirms in slow motion, trying to right itself. 
"We're not evil, Lenie," Scanlon says after a while.   If only she’d look at him, see the earnest expression on his helmeted face.  He’s practiced it for years.
But when she does look up, finally, she doesn’t even seem to notice.  "Don't flatter yourself, Scanlon,” she says.  “You don't have the slightest control over what you are."

#

TRANS/OFFI/280850:1043
There's no doubt that the ability to function down here stems from attributes which would, under other conditions, qualify as "dysfunctional".  These attributes not only permit long-term exposure to the rift; they may also intensify as a result of that exposure.  Lenie Clarke, for example, has developed a mutilation neurosis which she could not have had prior to her arrival here.  Her fascination with an animal which can be easily "fixed" when broken has fairly obvious roots, notwithstanding a number of horribly botched attempts at "repair".  Judith Caraco, who used to run indoor marathons prior to her arrest, compulsively swims up and down Beebe's transponder line.  The other participants have probably developed corresponding habits.
Whether these behaviors are indicative of a physiological addiction I can not yet say.  If they are, I suspect that Kenneth Lubin may be the furthest along.  During conversation with some of the other participants I have learned that Lubin may actually sleep outside on occasion, which can not be considered healthy by anyone's standards.  I would be better able to understand the reason for this if I had more particulars about Lubin's background.  Of course, his file as provided is missing certain relevant details.
On the job, the participants work unexpectedly well together, given the psychological baggage each of them carries.  Duty shifts carry an almost uncanny sense of coordination.  They seem choreographed.  It's almost as if—
This is a subjective impression, of course, but I believe that rifters do in fact share some heightened awareness of each other, at least when they're outside.  They may also have a heightened awareness of me— either that, or they've made some remarkably shrewd guesses about my state of mind.  

No.  Too, too—
Too easy to misinterpret.  If the haploids back on shore read that, they might think the vampires have the upper hand.  Scanlon deletes the last few lines, considers alternatives.
There's a word for his suspicions.  It's a word that describes your experience in an isolation tank, or in VR with all the inputs blanked, or— in extreme cases— when someone cuts the sensory cables of your central nervous system.  It describes that state of sensory deprivation in which whole sections of the brain go dark for want of input.  The word is Ganzfeld.
It's very quiet in a Ganzfeld.  Usually the temporal and occipital lobes seethe with input, signals strong enough to swamp any competition.  When those fall silent, though, the mind can sometimes make out faint whispers in the darkness.  It imagines scenes that have a curious likeness to those glowing on a television in some distant room, perhaps.   Or it feels a faint emotional echo, familiar but not, somehow, first-hand.
Statistics suggest that these sensations are not entirely imaginary.   Experts of an earlier decade— people much like Yves Scanlon, except for their luck in being in the right place at the right time— have even found out where the whispers come from.  
It turns out that protein microtubules, permeating each and every neuron, act as receivers for certain weak signals at the quantum level.  It turns out that consciousness itself is a quantum phenomenon.  It turns out that under certain conditions conscious systems can interact directly, bypassing the usual sensory middlemen.  
Not a bad payoff for something that started a hundred years ago with halved ping-pong balls taped over someone's eyes.
Ganzfeld.  That's the ticket.  Don't talk about the ease with which these creatures stare through you.  Forget the endpoint:  dissect the process.
Take control.

I believe some sort of Ganzfeld Effect may be at work here.  The dark, weightless abyssal environment might impoverish the senses enough to push the signal-to-noise ratio past threshold.  My observations suggest that the women may be more sensitive than the men, which is consistent given their larger corpus callosa and consequent advantage in intercortical processing speed..
Whatever the cause of this phenomenon, it has yet to affect me.  Perhaps it just takes a little time.
Oh, one other thing.  I was unable to find any record of Karl Acton using the medical scanner. I've asked Clarke and Brander about this, neither could remember Acton actually using the machine.  Given the number of injuries on record for everyone else, I find this surprising.

#
Yves Scanlon sits at the table and forces himself to eat with a mouth gone utterly dry.  He hears the vampires moving downstairs, moving along the corridor, moving just behind him.  He doesn’t turn around.  He mustn’t show any weakness.  He can’t betray any lack of confidence.
Vampires, he knows now, are like dogs.  They can smell fear.
His head is full of sampled sounds, looping endlessly.  You’re not among friends here, Scanlon.  Don’t make us into enemies.  That was Brander, five minutes ago, whispering in Scanlon’s ear before dropping down into the wetroom.  And Caraco click click clicking her bread knife against the table until he could barely hear himself think.  And Nakata and that stupid giggle of hers.  And Patricia Rowan, sometime in the imagined future, sneering  Well if you can't even handle a routine assignment without starting a revolt it's no wonder we didn't trust you...  
    Or perhaps, echoing back along a different timeline, a terse call to the GA:  We lost Scanlon.  Sorry.
And underlying it all, that long, hollow, icy sound, slithering along the floor of his brain.  That thing.  That thing that nobody mentions.   The voice in the abyss.  It sounds nearby tonight, whatever it is.
Not that that matters to the vampires.  They’re sealing their ‘skins while Scanlon sits frozen at the end of his meal, they’re grabbing their fins, dropping outside in ones and twos, deserting him.  They’re going out there, with the moaning thing.
Scanlon wonders, over the voices in his head, if it can get inside.  If this is the night they bring it back with them.

#

The vampires are all gone.  After a while, even the voices in Scanlon’s head start to fade.  Most of them.
This is insane.  I can't just sit here. 
There’s one voice he didn’t hear tonight.   Lenie Clarke just sat there through the whole fiasco, watching.  Clarke’s the one they look to, all right.  She doesn't talk much, but they pay attention when she does.  Scanlon wonders what she tells them, when he’s not around.
Can’t just sit here.  And it’s not that bad.  It’s not as though they really threatened me—
You’re not among friends here, Scanlon.
—not explicitly.
He tries to figure out exactly where he lost them.  It seemed like a reasonable enough proposition.  The prospect of shorter tours shouldn't have put them off like that.  Even if they are addicted to this godawful place, it was just a suggestion.  Scanlon went out of his way to be completely nonthreatening.  Unless they took exception to his mention of their carelessness in the safety department.  But that should have been old news; they not only knew the chances they were taking, they flaunted them.
Who am I kidding?  That's not when I lost them.  I shouldn't have mentioned Lubin, shouldn't have used him as an example.
It made so much sense at the time, though.   Scanlon  knows Lubin’s an outsider, even down here.  Scanlon’s not an idiot, he can read the signs even behind the eyecaps.  Lubin's different from the other vampires.   Using him as an example should have been the safest thing in the world.  Scapegoats have been a respected part of the therapeutic arsenal for hundreds of years.
Look, you want to end up like Lubin?  He sleeps outside,  for Christ’s sake!
Scanlon puts his head in his hands.  How was I supposed to know they all did?
Maybe he should have.   He could have monitored sonar more closely.  Or timed them when they went into their cubbies, seen how long they stayed inside.  There were things he could have done, he knows.  
Maybe I really did fuck up.  Maybe.  If only I’d—
Jesus, that sounds close.  What is—
Shut up!   Just shut the fuck up!

#

Maybe it shows up on sonar.
Scanlon takes a breath and ducks into Comm.  He’s had basic training on the gear, of course; it’s all pretty intuitive anyway.  He didn’t really need Clarke’s grudging tutorial.  A few seconds’ effort elicits a tactical overview:  vampires, strung like beads on an invisible line between Beebe and the Throat.  Another one off to the west, heading for the Throat; probably Lubin.  Random topography.  Nothing else.
As he watches, the four icons closest to Beebe edge a pixel or two closer to Main Street.  The fifth in line is way out ahead, almost as far out as Lubin.  Nearly at the Throat already.
Wait a second.
Vampires:  Brander, Caraco, Clarke, Lubin, Nakata.  Right.
Icons:  one, two, three, four, five—
Six.
Scanlon stares at the screen.  Oh shit.
Beebe’s phone link is very old-school; a direct line, not even routed through the telemetry and comm servers.   It’s almost Victorian in its simplicity, guaranteed to stay on-line through any systems crash short of an implosion.  Scanlon has never used it before.  Why should he?  The moment he calls home he’s admitting he can’t do the job by himself.
Now he hits the call stud without a moment’s hesitation.  “This is Scanlon, Human Resources.  I’ve got a bit of a—”
The line stays dark.
He tries again.  Dead.
Shit shit shit.  Somehow, though, he isn’t surprised.
I could call the vampires.  I could order them to come back in.  I have the authority.  It’s an amusing thought for a few moments.
At least the Voice seems to have faded.  He thinks he can hear it, if he concentrates, but it’s so faint it could even be his imagination.
Beebe squeezes down on him.  He looks back at the tactical display, hopefully.  One, two, three, f—
Oh shit.

#

He doesn’t remember going outside.  He remembers struggling into his preshmesh, and picking up a sonar pistol, and now he’s on the seabed, under Beebe.  He takes a bearing, checks it, checks it again.  It doesn’t change.  
He creeps away from the light, towards the Throat.  He fights with himself for endless moments, wins; his headlamp stays doused.  No sense in broadcasting his presence. 
He swims blind, hugging the bottom.  Every now and then he takes a bearing, resets his course.  Scanlon zigzags across the sea floor.  Eventually the abyss begins to lighten before him.
Something moans, directly ahead.
It doesn’t sound lonely any more.  It sounds cold and hungry and utterly inhuman.  Scanlon freezes like a night creature caught in headlights.
After a while the sound goes away.
The Throat glimmers half-resolved, maybe twenty meters ahead.   It looks like a spectral collection of buildings and derricks set down on the moon. Murky copper lights spills down from floods set half-way up the generators.  Scanlon circles, just beyond the light.
Something moves, off to the left.  
An alien sigh.
He flattens down onto the bottom, eyes closed.  Grow up, Scanlon.  Whatever it is, it can’t hurt you.  Nothing can bite through preshmesh. 
Nothing flesh and blood...
He refuses to finish the thought.  He opens his eyes.
When it moves again,  Scanlon is staring right at it.
A black plume, jetting from a chimney of rock on the seabed.  And this time it doesn’t just sigh; it moans. 
A smoker.  That’s all it is.  Acton went down one of those.
Maybe this one—
The eruption peters out.  The sound whispers away.
Smokers aren’t supposed to make sounds.  Not like that, anyway.
Scanlon edges up to the lip of the chimney.  50C.  Inside, anchored about two meters down, is some sort of machine.  It’s been built out of things that were never meant to fit together;  rotary blades spinning in the vestigial current, perforated tubes, pipes anchored at haphazard angles.  The smoker is crammed with junk.
And somehow, the water jets through it and comes out singing.  Not a ghost.  Not an alien predator, after all.  Just— windchimes.  Relief sweeps through Scanlon’s body in a chemical wave.  He relaxes, soaking in the sensation, until he remembers:
Six contacts.  Six.
And here he is, floodlit, in full view.  
Scanlon retreats back into darkness.  The machinery behind his nightmares, exposed and almost pedestrian, has bolstered his confidence.   He resumes his patrol.  The Throat rotates slowly to his right, a murky monochrome graphic.
Something fades into view ahead, floating above an outcropping of featherworms.  Scanlon slips closer, hides behind a convenient piece of rock 
Vampires.  Two of them.
They don't look the same.  
Vampires usually look alike out here, it's almost impossible to tell them apart.  But Scanlon’s sure he’s never seen one of these two before.  It’s facing away from him, but there’s still something— it’s too tall and thin, somehow.  It moves in furtive starts and twitches, almost birdlike.  Reptilian.  It carries something under one arm. 
Scanlon can’t tell what sex it is.  The other vampire, though, looks female.  The two of them hang in the water a few meters apart, facing each other.  Every now and then the female gestures with her hands; sometimes she moves too suddenly and the other one jumps a little, as if startled.
He clicks through the voice channels.  Nothing.  After a while the female reaches out, almost tentatively, and touches the reptile.  There’s something almost gentle— in an alien way—  about the way she does that.  Then she turns and swims off into the darkness.  The reptile stays behind, drifting slowly on its axis.   Its face comes into view.
Its hood seal is open.  Its face is so pale that Scanlon can barely tell where skin ends and eyecaps begin; it almost looks as if this creature has no eyes.
The thing under its arm is the shredded remains of one of Channer’s monster fish.  As Scanlon watches, the reptile brings it up to its mouth and tears off a chunk.  Swallows.
The voice in the Throat moans in the distance, but the reptile doesn’t seem to notice.
Its uniform has the usual GA logo stamped onto the shoulders.  The usual name tag underneath.
Who—?
Its blank empty face sweeps right past Scanlon’s hiding place without pausing.  A moment later it’s facing away again.
It’s all alone out there.  It doesn’t look dangerous.  
Scanlon braces against his rock, pushes off.   Water pushes back, slowing him instantly.   The reptile doesn’t see him.  Scanlon kicks.  He’s only a few meters away when he remembers.
Ganzfeld Effect.  What if there’s some Ganzfeld Effect down h—
The reptile spins suddenly, staring directly at him. 
Scanlon lunges.  Another split-second and he wouldn’t even have come close, but fortune smiles; he catches onto one of the creature’s fins as it dives away.  Its other foot lashes back, bounces off the helmet.  Again, lower down; Scanlon’s sonar pistol spins away from his belt.
He hangs on.  The reptile comes at him with both fists, utterly silent.  Scanlon barely feels the blows through his preshmesh.  He hits back with the familiar desperation of a childhood punching bag, cornered again, feeble self-defense his only option.
Until it dawns on him that this time, somehow, it’s working.
He’s not facing the neighborhood bully here.  He’s not paying the price for careless eye contact with some australopithecine at the local drink’n’drug.  He fighting a spindly little freak that’s trying to get away.  From him.  This guy is downright feeble.  
For the first time in his life, Yves Scanlon is winning a fight.
His fist connects, a chain-mail mace.  The enemy jerks and struggles.  Scanlon grabs, twists, wrestles his quarry into an armlock.  His victim flails around, utterly helpless.
“You’re not going anywhere, friend.”  Finally, a chance to try out that tone of easy contempt he’s been practicing since the age of seven.  It sounds good.  It sounds confident, in control.  “Not until I find out just what the fuck is—”
The lights go out.
The whole Throat goes dark, suddenly and without fuss.  It takes a few seconds to blink away the afterimages; finally, in the extreme distance, Scanlon makes out a very faint gray glow.  Beebe.
It dies as he watches.  The creature in his arms has grown very still.
"Let him go, Scanlon."
"Clarke?"  It might be Clarke.  The vocoders don't mask everything, there are subtle differences that Scanlon's just beginning to recognize.  "Is that you?"  He gets his headlamp on, but no matter where he points it there's nothing to see.
"You'll break his arms," the voice says.  Clarke.  Got to be.
"I'm not that—" strong— "clumsy," Scanlon says to the abyss.
"You don't have to be.  His bones have decalcified."  A momentary silence.  "He's fragile."
Scanlon loosens his grip a bit.  He twists back and forth, trying to catch sight of something.  Anything.   All that comes into view is his prisoner's shoulder patch.  
Fischer.
But he went missing— Scanlon counts back— seven months ago!
"Let him go, cocksucker."  A different voice, this time.  Brander's.
"Now," it buzzes.  "Or I'll fucking kill you."
 Brander?  Brander actually defending a pedophile?  How the hell did that happen? 
It doesn't matter now.  There are other things to worry about.
"Where are you?" Scanlon calls out.  "What are you so afraid of?"  He doesn't expect such an obvious goad to work.  He's just buying time, trying to delay the inevitable.  He can't just let Fischer go; he's out of options the moment that happens.
Something moves, just to the left.  Scanlon spins; a flurry of motion out there, maybe a hint of limbs caught in the beam.  Too many for one person.  Then nothing.   
He tried to do it, Scanlon realizes.  Brander just tried to kill me, and they held him back.
For now.
"Last chance, Scanlon."  Clarke again, close and invisible, as though she's humming in his ear.  "We don't have to lay a hand on you, you know?  We can just leave you here.  You don't let him go in ten seconds and I swear you'll never find your way back.  One."
"And even if you did," adds another voice— Scanlon doesn't know who— "we'd be waiting for you there."
"Two."
He checks the helmet dashboard laid out around his chin.   The vampires have shut off Beebe's homing beacon.
"Three."
He checks his compass.  The readout won't settle.  No surprise there; magnetic navigation is a joke on the rift.
"Four."
"Fine," Scanlon tries.  "Leave me here.  I don't care.  I'll—"
"Five."
"—just head for the surface.  I can last for days in this suit."  Sure.  As if they'll just let you float away with their— what is Fischer to them, anyway?  Pet?  Mascot?
"Six."
Role model?
"Seven."
Oh God.  Oh God.
"Eight." 
"Please," he whispers.
"Nine."
He opens his arms.  Fischer dives away into the dark.
Stops.
Turns back and hangs there in the water, five meters away. 
"Fischer?"  Scanlon looks around.  For all he can tell, they are the only two particles in the universe.  "Can you understand me?"
He extends his arm.  Fischer starts, like a nervous fish, but doesn't bolt.
Scanlon scans the abyss. "Is this how you want to end up?" he calls out.   
Nobody answers.
"You have any idea what seven months of sensory deprivation does to your mind?  You think he's even close to being human any more?  Are you going to spend the rest of your lives rooting around here in the mud, eating worms?  Is that what you want?"
"What we want," something buzzes from the darkness, "is to be left alone."
"That's not going to happen.  No matter what you do to me.  You can't stay down here forever."
Nobody bothers to disagree.  Fischer continues to float before him, his head cocked to one side.
"Listen, C— Lenie.  Mike.  All of you."  The headlight beam sweeps back and forth, empty.  "It's just a job.  It's not a lifestyle."  But Scanlon knows that's a lie.  All these people were rifters long before the job existed.
"They'll come for you," he says softly, and he doesn't know whether it's a threat or a warning.
"Maybe we won't be here," the abyss replies at last.
Oh, God.  "Look, I don't know what's happening down here, but you can't want to stay here, nobody in their— I mean— Jesus, where are you?"
No answer.  Only Fischer.
"This wasn't how it was supposed to go," Scanlon says, pleading.
And then, "I never meant for—  I mean I didn't—"
And then only "I'm sorry. I'm sorry..."
And then nothing at all, except the darkness.

#

Eventually the lights come back on, and Beebe beeps reassuringly on its designated channel.  Gerry Fischer is gone by then;  Scanlon isn't sure when he left.
He's not sure the others were ever there.  He swims back to Beebe, alone.
They probably didn't even hear me.  Not really.  Which is a shame, because there at the end he was actually telling the truth.
He wishes he could pity them.  It should be easy; they hide in the dark, they hide behind their eyecaps as though photocollagen is some sort of general anesthetic.  They warrant the pity of real people.  But how can you pity someone who's somehow better off than you are?  How can you pity someone who, in some sick way, seems to be happy?
How can you pity someone who scares you to death?
And besides, they walked all over me.  I couldn't control them at all.  Have I made a single real choice since I came down?
Sure.  I gave them Fischer, and they let me live.  
Yves Scanlon wonders, briefly, how to put that into the official record without making himself look like a complete screwup.
In the end, he doesn't really care. 

#
TRANS/OFFI/300850:1043
I have recently encountered evidence of...  that is, I believe...
The behavior of Beebe Station personnel is distinctively...
I have recently participated in a telling exchange with station personnel.  I managed to avoid outright confrontation, although...
Ah, fuck it.

#
T minus twenty minutes, and except for Yves Scanlon, Beebe is deserted.
It's been like this for the past couple of days.  The vampires just don't come inside much any more.  Maybe they're deliberately excluding him.  Maybe they're just reverting to their natural state.  He can't tell.
It's just as well.  By now, the two sides have very little left to say to each other.
The shuttle should be almost here.  Scanlon summons his resolve: when they come, they're not going to find him hiding in his cubby.  He's going to be in the lounge, in plain view. 
He takes a breath, holds it, listens.  Beebe creaks and drips around him.  No other sounds of life.
He gets off the pallet and presses an ear against the bulkhead.  Nothing.  He undogs the cubby hatch, opens it a few centimeters, peers out.
Nothing.
His suitcase has been packed for hours.  He grabs it off the deck, swings the hatch all the way open, and strides purposefully down the corridor.
He sees the shadow just before he enters the lounge, a dim silhouette against the bulkhead.  A part of him wants to turn and run back to his cubby, but it's a much smaller part than it used to be.  Most of him is just tired.  He steps forward.
Lubin is waiting there, standing motionless beside the ladder.  He stares through Scanlon with eyes of solid ivory.
"I wanted to say goodbye," he says.
Scanlon laughs.  He can't help it.
Lubin watches impassively.
"I'm sorry," Scanlon says.  He doesn't feel even slightly amused.  "It's just— you never even said hello, you know?"
"Yes," Lubin says.  "Well."
Somehow, there's no sense of threat about him this time.  Scanlon can't quite understand why; Lubin's background file is still full of holes, the rumors are still festering over Galápagos; even the other vampires keep their distance from this one.  But none of that shows through right now.  Lubin just stands there, shifting his weight from one foot to the other.  He looks almost vulnerable.
"So they're going to be bringing us back early," he says.
"I honestly don't know.  It's not my decision."
"But they sent you down to— prepare the way.  Like John the Baptist."
It's a very strange analogy, coming from Lubin.  Scanlon says nothing.
"Did you—  didn't they know we wouldn't want to come back?  Didn't they count on it?"
"It wasn't like that."  But he wonders, more than ever, what the GA knew.
Lubin clears his throat.  He seems very much to want to say something, but doesn't.
"I found the windchimes," Scanlon says at last.
"Yes."
"They scared the hell out of me."
Lubin shakes his head.  "That's not what they were for."
"What were they for?"
"Just— a hobby, really.  We've all got hobbies here.  Lenie does her starfish.  Alice— dreams.  This place has a way of taking ugly things and lighting them in a certain way, so they almost look beautiful."  A shrug.  "I build memorials."
"Memorials."
Lubin nods.  "The windchimes were for Acton."
"I see."
Something drops onto Beebe with a clank.  Scanlon jumps.
Lubin doesn't react.  "I'm thinking of building another set," he says.  "For Fischer, maybe."
"Memorials are for dead people.  Fischer's still alive."  Technically, anyway.
"Okay then.  I'll make them for you."
The overhead hatch drops open.  Scanlon grips his suitcase and starts to climb, one-handed.
"Sir—"
Scanlon looks down, surprised.
"I—"  Lubin stops himself.  "We could have treated you better," he says at last.  
Scanlon knows, somehow, that this is not what Lubin intended to say.  He waits.  But Lubin offers nothing more.
"Thanks," Scanlon says, and climbs out of Beebe forever.  
The chamber he rises into is wrong.  He looks around, disoriented; this isn't the usual shuttle.  The passenger compartment is too small, the walls studded with an array of nozzles.  Forward, the cockpit hatch is sealed.  A strange face looks back through the porthole as the ventral hatch swings shut.
"Hey..."
The face disappears.  The compartment resonates with the sound of metal mouths disengaging.  A slight lurch and the 'scaphe is rising free.
A fine aerosol mist hisses from the nozzles.  It stings Scanlon's eyes.  An unfamiliar voice reassures him from the cabin speaker.  Nothing to worry about, it says.  Just a routine precaution.
Everything's just fine.


Seine


ENTROPY
Maybe things are getting out of hand, Lenie Clarke wonders.
The others don't seem to care.  She hears Lubin and Caraco talking up in the lounge, hears Brander trying to sing in the shower— as if we didn't all get enough abuse during our childhoods— and envies their unconcern.   Everyone hated Scanlon— well, not hate, exactly, that's a bit strong— but there was at least a sort of—
Contempt—
That's the word.  Contempt.  Back on the surface, Scanlon ticked everyone.  No matter what you said to him he'd nod, make little encouraging noises, do everything to convince you that he was on your side.   Except actually agree with you, of course.  You didn't need fine-tuning to see through that shit; everyone down here already had too many Scanlons in their past, the official sympathizers, the instant friends who gently encouraged you to go back home, drop the charges, carefully pretending it was your interests being served.  Back then Scanlon was just another patronizing bastard with a shaved deck, and if fortune put him down here on rifter turf for a while, who could be blamed for having a little fun with him?
But we could have killed him.
He started it.   He attacked Gerry.  He was holding him hostage.
As if the GA's going to make any sort of allowance for that...
So far, Clarke's kept her doubts to herself.  It's not that she fears no one will listen to her.   She fears the exact opposite.  She doesn't want to change anybody's mind.  She's not out to rally the troops.  Initiative is a prerogative of leaders; she doesn't want the responsibility.  The last thing she wants to be is
Leader of the pack, Len.  Head wolf. A-fucking-kayla.
Acton's been dead for months and he's still laughing at her.
Okay.  Scanlon was a nuisance at worst.  At best he was an amusing diversion.  "Shit," Brander said once, "You tune him in out there?  I bet the GA doesn't even take him seriously."  The Grid needs them, and it's not going to pull the plug just because a few rifters had some fun with an asshole like Scanlon.  Makes sense.
Still, Clarke can't help thinking about consequences.  She's never been able to avoid them in the past.
Brander's finally out of the shower; his voice drifts down from the lounge.  Showers are an indulgence down here, hardly necessary when you live inside a self-flushing semipermeable diveskin but a sheer hot hedonistic pleasure just the same.   Clarke grabs a towel off the rack and heads up the ladder before anyone else can cut in.
"Hey, Len."  Caraco, seated at the table with Brander, waves her over.  "Check out the new look."
Brander's in real shirtsleeves.  He doesn't even have his caps in.  
His eyes are brown.
"Wow."  Clarke doesn't know what else to say.  Those eyes look really strange.  She looks around, vaguely uncomfortable.  Lubin's over on the sofa, watching.  "What do you think, Ken?"
Lubin shakes his head.  "Why do you want to look like a dryback?"
Brander shrugs.  "Don't know.  I just felt like giving my eyes a rest for a couple of hours.  I guess seeing Scanlon down here in shirtsleeves all the time."  Not that anyone would even think of popping their caps in front of Scanlon. 
Caraco affects an exaggerated shudder.  "Please.  Tell me he's not your new role model."
"He wasn't even my old one," Brander says.
Clarke can't get used to it.  "Doesn't it bother you?"  —Walking around naked like that?
"Actually, the only thing that bothers me is I can't see squat.  Unless someone wants to turn up the lights..."
"So anyway."  Caraco picks up the thread of some previous conversation.  "You came down here why?"
"It's safe," Brander says, blinking against his own personal darkness.
"Uh huh."
"Safer, anyway.  You were up there not so long ago.  Didn't you see it?"
"I think what I saw up there was sort of skewed.  That's why I'm down here."
"You never thought that things were getting, well, top-heavy?"
Caraco shrugs.  Clarke, imagining steamy needles of water, takes a step towards the corridor.
"I mean, look how fast the net changed," Brander says.  "It wasn't that long ago you could just sit in your living room and go all over the world, remember?  Anywhere could link up with anywhere else, for as long as they liked."
Clarke turns back.  She remembers those days.  Vaguely.
"What about the bugs?" she asks.
"There weren't any.  Or there were, but they were really simple.  Couldn't rewrite themselves, couldn't handle different operating systems.  Just a minor inconvenience at first, really."
"But there were these laws they taught us in school," Caraco says.
Lenie remembers:  "Explosive speciation.  Brookes' Laws."
Brander holds up a finger.  "Self-replicating information strings evolve as a sigmoid-difference function of replication error rate and generation time."  Two fingers.  "Evolving information strings are vulnerable to parasitism by competing strings with sigmoid-difference functions of lesser wavelength."  Three.  "Strings under pressure from parasites develop random substring-exchange protocols as a function of the wavelength ratio of the host and parasite sigmoid functions.  Or something like that."
Caraco looks at Clarke, then back at Brander.  "What?"
"Life evolves.  Parasites evolve.  Sex evolves to counter the parasites.  Shuffles the genes so they have to shoot for a moving target.  Everything else— species diversity, density-dependence, everything— it all follows from those three laws.  You get a self-replicating string past a certain threshold, it's like a nuclear reaction."
"Life explodes," Clarke murmurs.
"Actually, information explodes.  Organic life's just a really slow example.  Happened a lot faster in the net."
Caraco shakes her head.  "So what?  You're saying you came down here to get away from bugs in the Internet?"
"I came down here to get away from entropy."
"I think," Clarke remarks, "You've got one of those language disorders.  Dyslexia or something."
But Brander's going full tilt now.  "You've heard the phrase Entropy increases? Everything falls apart eventually.  You can postpone it for a while, but that takes energy.  The more complicated the system, the more energy it needs to stay in one piece.  Back before us everything was sun-powered, all the plants were like these little solar batteries that everything else could build on.  Only now we've got this society that's on an exponential complexity curve, and the 'net's on the same curve only a lot steeper, right?  So we're all balled up in this runaway machine, it's got so complicated it's always on the verge of flying apart, and the only thing that prevents that is all the energy we feed it."
"Bad news," Caraco says.  Clarke doesn't think she's really getting the point, though.
"Good news, actually. They'll always need more energy, so they'll always need us.  Even if they ever do get fusion figured out."
"Yeah, but—"  Caraco's frowning all of a sudden. "If you say it's exponential, then it hits a wall eventually, right?  The curve goes straight up and down."
Brander nods.  "Yup."
"But that's infinity.  There's no way you could keep things from falling apart, no matter how much power we pump out.  It'd never be enough. Sooner or later—"
"Sooner," says Brander, "And that's why I'm staying right here.  Like I said, it's safer."
Clarke looks from Brander to Caraco to Brander.  "That is just so much bullshit."
"How so?"  Brander doesn't seem offended.
"Because we'd have heard about it before now.  Especially if it's based on some kind of physical law everyone knows about.  They couldn't keep something like that under wraps, people would keep figuring it out for themselves."
"Oh, I think they have," Brander says mildly, smiling from naked brown eyes.  "They'd just rather not think about it too much."
"Where do you get all this, Mike?"  Clarke asks.  "The library?"
He shakes his head.  "Got a degree.  Systems ecology, artificial life."
Clarke nods.  "I always thought you were too smart to be a Rifter."
"Hey.  A rifter's the smartest thing to be right now."
"So you chose to come down here?  You actually applied?"
Brander frowns.  "Sure.  Didn't you?"
"I got a phone call.  Offered me this new high-paying career, even said I could go back to my old job if it didn't work out."
"What was your old job?"  Caraco wonders.
"Public relations.  Mostly Honquarium franchises."
"You?"
"Maybe I wasn't very good at it.  What about you?"
"Me?"  Caraco bites her lip.  "It was sort of a deal.  One year with an option to renew, in lieu of prosecution."  The corner of her mouth twitches.  "Price of revenge.  It was worth it."
Brander leans back in his chair, looks around Clarke.  "What about you, Ken?  Where'd you come—"
Clarke turns to follow Brander's stare.  The sofa's empty.  Down the corridor, Clarke can hear the shower door swinging shut.
Shit.
Still, it'll only be a short wait.  Lubin's already been inside for four hours straight, he'll be gone in no time.  And it's not as though there's any shortage of hot water.
"They should just shut the whole bloody net down for a while,"  Caraco is saying behind her.  "Just pull the plug.  Bugs wouldn't be able to handle that, I bet."
Brander laughs, comfortably blind.  "Probably not.  Of course, neither would the rest of us." 



CAROUSEL
She's been staring at the screen for two minutes and she still can't see what Nakata's going on about.  Ridges and fissures run along the display like long green wrinkles.  The Throat returns its usual echoes, crammed especially close to center screen because Nakata's got the range topped out.  Occasionally a small blip appears between two of the larger ones: Lubin, lazing through an uneventful shift.
Other than that, nothing.
Lenie Clarke bites her lip.  "I don't see any—"
"Just wait.  I know I saw it."
Brander looks in from the lounge.  "Saw what?"
"Alice says she's got something bearing three twenty."
Maybe it's Gerry, Clarke muses.  But Nakata wouldn't raise the alarm over that. 
"It was just— there!" Nakata jabs her finger at the display, vindicated.
Something hovers at the very edge of Beebe's vision.  Distance and diffraction make it hazy, but to bounce any kind of signal at that range it's got to have a lot of metal.  As Clarke watches, the contact fades.
"Not one of us," Clarke says.
"It's big." Brander squints at the panel; his eyecaps reflect through white slits.
"Muckraker?" Clarke suggests.  "A sub, maybe?"
Brander grunts.
"There it is again," Nakata says.
"There they are," Brander amends.  Two echoes tease the edge of the screen now, almost indiscernible.  Two large, unidentified objects, now rising just barely clear of the bottom clutter, now sinking back down into mere noise.
Gone.
"Hey," Clarke says, pointing.  There's a tremor rippling along the seismo display, setting off sensors in a wave from the northwest.  Nakata taps commands, gets a retrodict bearing on the epicenter.  Three-twenty.
"There is nothing scheduled to be out there," she says.
"Nothing anyone bothered to tell us about, anyway."  Clarke rubs the bridge of her nose.  "So who's coming?"
Brander nods.  Nakata shakes her head.  "I'll wait for Judy."
"Oh, that's right.  She's going all the way today, isn't she?  Surface and back?"
"Yes.  She should be back in maybe an hour."
"Okay."  Brander's on his way downstairs.  Clarke reaches past Nakata and taps into an outside channel.  "Hey Ken. Wake up." 

#

I tell myself I know this place, she muses.  I call this my home.
I don't know anything. 
Brander cruises just below her, lit from underneath by a seabed on fire.  The world ripples with color, blues and yellows and greens so pure it almost hurts to look at them.  A dusting of violet stars coalesces and sweeps across the bottom; a school of shrimp, royally luminous.
"Has anyone been—" Clarke begins, but she feels wonder and surprise from Brander.  It's obvious he hasn't seen this before.  And Lubin— "It's news to me," Lubin answers aloud, as dark as ever.
"It's gorgeous,"  Brander says.  "We've been down here how long, and we never even knew this place existed..." 
Except Gerry, maybe.  Every now and then Beebe's sonar picks someone up in this direction, when everyone else is accounted for.  Not this far out, of course, but who knows how far afield Fischer— or whatever Fischer's become— wanders these days?
Brander drops away from his squid and coasts down, one arm outstretched.   Clarke watches him scoop something off the bottom.  A faint tingle clouds her mind for a moment— that indefinable sense of some other mind working nearby— and she's past him, her own squid towing her away.
"Hey Len," Brander buzzes after her.  "Check this out."
She releases the throttle and arcs back.  Brander's got a glassy jointed creature in the palm of his hand.   It looks a bit like that shrimp Acton found, back when—
"Don't hurt it," she says.
Brander's mask stares back at her.  "Why would I hurt it?  I just wanted to you to see its eyes."
There's something about the way Brander's radiating.  It's as though he's a little bit out of synch with himself, somehow, as though his brain is broadcasting on two bands at once.  Clarke shakes her head.  The sensation passes.
"It doesn't have eyes," she says, looking.
"Sure it does.  Just not on its head."
He flips it over, uses thumb and forefinger to pin it upside-down against the palm of his other hand.  Rows of limbs— legs, maybe, or gills— scramble uselessly for purchase.  Between them, where joints meet body, a row of tiny black spheres stare back at Lenie Clarke.
"Weird,"  she says.  "Eyes on its stomach."
She's feeling it again: a strange, almost prismatic sense of  fractured awareness.
Brander lets the creature go.  "Makes sense.  Seeing as how all the light down here comes from below."  Suddenly he looks at Clarke, radiating confusion.  "Hey Len, you feeling okay?"
"Yeah, I'm fine."
"You seem kind of—"
"Split," they say, simultaneously.
Realization.  She doesn't know how much of it is hers and how much she's tuning in from Brander, but suddenly they both know.
"There's someone else here," Brander says, unnecessarily.
Clarke looks around.  Lubin.  She can't see him.
"Shit.  You think that's it?"  Brander's scanning the water too.  "You think ol' Ken is finally starting to tune in?"
"I don't know."
"Who else could it be?"
"I don't know.  Who else is out here?"
"Mike.  Lenie."  Lubin's voice, faintly, from somewhere ahead.
Clarke looks at Brander.  Brander looks back.
"Right here," Brander calls, edging his volume up.
"I found it,"  Lubin says, invisibly distant.
Clarke launches off the bottom and grabs her squid.  Brander's right beside her, sonar pistol out and clicking.  "Got him," he says after a moment.  "That way."
"What else?"
"Don't know.   Big, anyhow.  Three, four meters.  Metallic."
Clarke tweaks the throttle.  Brander follows.  A riot of fractured color unspools below them.
"There."
Ahead of them, a mesh of green light sections the bottom into squares.
"What—"
"Lasers," Brander says.  "I think."
Emerald threads float perfectly straight, a luminous profusion of right angles a few centimeters off the bottom.  Beneath them, drab metal pipes run along the rock; tiny prisms erupt at regular intervals along their length, like spines.  Each prism, an interstice; from each interstice, four beams of coherent light, and four, and four, a wire-frame checkerboard overlaid against bedrock.
They cruise two meters over the grid.  "I'm not sure," Brander grates, "but I think it's all just one beam.  Reflected back across itself."
"Mike—"
"I see it," he says.
At first it's just a fuzzy green column resolving out of the middle distance.  Nearness brings clarity;  the beams crisscrossing the ocean floor converge in a circle here, bend vertically up to form the luminous bars of a cylindrical cage.  Within that cage a thick metal stalk rises out of the seabed.  A great disk flowers at its top,  spreads out like some industrial parasol.  The spokes of laser light stream down from its perimeter and bounce endlessly away along the bottom.
"It's like a— a carousel,"  Clarke buzzes, remembering an old picture from an even older time.  "Without horses..."
"Don't block those beams,"  Lubin buzzes.   He's hanging off to one side, aiming a sonar pistol at the structure.  "They're too weak to hurt you unless you get it in the eye, but you don't want to interfere with what they're doing."
"And that is?"  Brander says.
Lubin doesn't answer. 
What in the world—  But Clarke's confusion is only partly directed at the mechanism before her.  The rest dwells on a disorienting sense of alien cognition, very strong now, not her, not Brander, but somehow familiar.
Ken?  That you?
"This isn't what we saw on sonar," Brander's saying.  Clarke feels his confusion even as he talks over it.  "Whatever we saw was moving around."
"Whatever we saw was probably planting this," Lubin buzzes.  "It's long gone by now."
"But what is..."  Brander's voice trails down to a mechanical croak.
No.  It's not Lubin.  She knows that now.
"It's thinking," she says.  "It's alive."
Lubin's got another instrument out now.  Clarke can't see the visual readout but its telltale tic tic ticking carries clearly through the water.
"It's radioactive," he says.

#

Alice Nakata's voice comes to them in the endless darkness between Beebe and the Land of the Carousel.
"—Judy—" it whispers, almost too faint to make out.  "—scatter— lay—"
"Alice?"  Clarke's got her vocoder cranked loud enough to hurt her own ears.  "We can't hear you.  Say again?"
"—just— no sign—"
Clarke can barely distinguish the words.  Somehow, though, she can hear the fear in them.
A small tremor shudders past, raising clouds of mud and swamping Nakata's signal.  Lubin throttles up his squid and pulls away.  Clarke and Brander follow suit.  Somewhere in the darkness ahead, Beebe draws closer in decibel fractions.
The next words they hear manage to cut through the noise:  "Judy's gone!"
"Gone?" Brander echoes.  "Gone where?"
"She just disappeared!"  The voice hisses softly from every direction.  "I was  talking to her.  She was up above the deep scattering layer, she was— I was telling her about the signal we saw and she said she saw something too and then she was gone..."
"Did you check sonar?" Lubin wants to know.
"Yes! Yes of course I checked the sonar!"  Nakata's words are increasingly clear.  "As soon as she was cut off I checked but I saw nothing for sure.  There was something, maybe, but the scattering layer is very thick today, I could not be sure.  And it's been fifteen minutes now and she still hasn't come back..."
"Sonar wouldn't pick her up anyway,"  Brander says softly.  "Not through the DSL."
Lubin ignores him.  "Listen, Alice.  Did she say what she saw?" 
"No.  Just something, she said, and then I heard nothing more."
"Your sonar contact.  How big?"
"I don't know!  It was just there for a second, and the layer—"
"Could it have been a sub?  Alice?"
"I don't know!"  the voice cries, disembodied and anguished.  "Why would it?  Why would anyone?"
Nobody answers.  The squids race on.



ECDYSIS

They dump her out of the airlock, still caught in the tangleweb.  She knows better than to fight under these conditions, but the situation's got to change pretty soon.  She thinks they may have tried gassing her in the 'lock.  Why else would they leave their headsets on after the lock had drained?  What about that faint hiss that lasted a few seconds too long after blowdown?  It's a pretty subtle cue, but you don't spend most of a year on the rift without learning what an airlock sounds like.  There was something a bit off about that one.  
No matter.  You'd be surprised how much O2  can be electrolyzed from just the little bit of water left sloshing around in the ol' thoracic plumbing.  Judy Caraco can hold her breath until the cows come home, whatever the fuck that means.  And now, maybe they think their gas-chamber-that-blows-like-an-airlock has got her doped or unconscious or just very laid back.   Maybe now they'll take her out of this fucking net.
She waits, limp.  Sure enough there's a soft electrical cackle and the web falls away, all those sticky molecular tails polarizing flat like Velcro slicking down to cat fur.   She stares out through glassy unblinking eyecaps— no cues they can read there— and counts three, with maybe more behind her.  
They're zombies, or something.
Their skin looks rotten with jaundice.  Fingernails are barely distinguishable from fingers.  Faces are slightly distorted, blurred behind stretched, yellowish membrane.  Waxy, dark ovals protrude through the film where their mouths should be.
Body condoms, Caraco realizes after a moment.  What is this?  Do they think I'm contagious?
And a moment later:  Am I?
One of them reaches towards her holding something like a handgun.
She lashes out with one arm.  She'd rather have kicked— more strength in the legs— but the refsuckers that brought her in didn't bother taking off her flippers.  She connects:  a nose, it feels like.  A nose under latex.  A satisfying crunch.  Someone's found sudden cause to regret their own presumption.
There's a moment's shocked silence.  Caraco uses it, flips onto her side and swings one flippered foot backwards, heel first, into the back of someone's knee.  A woman cries out, a startled face topples past, a smear of red hair plastered against its cheek, and Judy Caraco is reaching down to get those big clown-foot flippers off in time to—
The tip of a shockprod hovers ten centimeters from her nose.  It doesn't waver a millimeter.  After a moment's indecision— how far can I push this, anyway?— Caraco stops moving.
"Get up," says the man with the prod.  She can barely see, through the condom, shadows where his eyes should be.
Slowly, she takes off her fins and stands.  She never had a chance, of course.  She knew that all along.  But they obviously want her alive for something, or they would never have bothered bringing her on board.  And she, in turn, wants to make it clear that these fuckers are not going to intimidate her, no matter how many of them there are.
There's catharsis to be had in even a losing fight.
"Calm down," the man says— one of four, she sees now, including the one backing out of the compartment with a red stain spreading under his caul. "We're not trying to hurt you.  But you know you shouldn't have tried to leave."
"Leave?"  His clothes— all of their clothes— are uniform but not uniforms:  loose-fitting white jumpsuits with an unmistakable look of disposability.  No insignia.  No name tags.  Caraco turns her attention to the sub itself.
"Now we're going to get you out of that diveskin," the prodmaster continues.  "And we're going to give you a quick medical workup.  Nothing too intrusive, I assure you."
Not a large craft, judging from the curvature of the bulkhead.  But fast.  Caraco knew that from the moment it resolved out of the murk above her.   She didn't see much, then, but she saw enough.  This boat has wings.  It could lap an orca on steroids.
"Who are you guys?" she asks.
"Your cooperation would make us all very grateful," Prodmaster says, as if she hasn't spoken, "And then maybe you can tell us exactly what you're trying to escape from out here in the middle of the Pacific."
"Escape?"  Caraco snorts.  "I was doing laps, you idiot."
"Uh huh."  He returns his shockprod to a holster on his belt, leaves one hand resting lightly on the handle.
The gun is back, in different hands.  It looks like a cross between a staple gun and a circuit-tester.  The redhead pushes it firmly onto Caraco's shoulder.  Caraco controls the urge to push back.  A faint electrical tingle and her diveskin drops away in pieces.  There go her arms.  There go her legs.  Her torso splits like a molting insect and drops away, short-circuited.  She stands utterly 'skinned, surrounded by strangers.  A naked mulatto woman looks back at her from a mirror on the bulkhead.  Somehow, even stripped, she looks strong.  Her eyes, brilliant white in that dark face, are cold and invulnerable.  She smiles.
"That wasn't too bad, was it."  There's a trained kindness to the other woman's voice.  Almost like I didn't just dump her on the deck.
They lead her through a passageway to a table in a compact Med cubby.  The redhead places a membrane-sheathed hand on Caraco's arm, her touch just slightly sticky;  Caraco shrugs it off.  There's only room for two others in here besides Caraco. Three squeeze in:  the redhead, the prodmaster, and a shorter male, a bit chubby.  Caraco looks at his face, but she can't see details under the condom.
"I hope you can see out of that thing better than I can see in," she says.
A soft background humming, too monotonous to register until now, rises subtly in pitch.  There's a sense of sudden acceleration;  Caraco staggers a bit, catches herself on the table.
"If you could just lie back, Ms. Caraco—"
They stretch her out on the table.  The chubby male pastes a few leads at strategic points along her body and proceeds to take very small pieces out of her.  "No, this isn't good.  Not at all."  Cantonese accent.  "Poor epithelial turgor, you know diveskin's only an expression, you weren't supposed to live in it."  The touch of his fingers on her skin: like the redhead's, thin sticky rubber.  "Now look at you," he says.  "Half your sebaceous glands are shut down, your vit K's low, you haven't been taking your UV either have you?"
Caraco doesn't answer.  Mr. Canton continues to draw samples on her left.  At the other side of the table, the redhead offers what she probably thinks is a reassuring smile, mostly hidden behind the oval mouthpiece.
Down at Caraco's feet, just in front of the hatchway,  Prodmaster stands motionless.
"Yes, too much time sealed up in that diveskin," says Mr. Canton.  "Did you ever take it off?  Even outside?"
The redhead leans forward confidentially.  "It's important, Judy.  There could be health complications.  We really should know if you ever opened up outside.  For an emergency of some kind, maybe."
"If your 'skin was— punctured, for example."  Mr. Canton affixes some kind of ocular device onto the membrane over his left eye, peers into Caraco's ear.  "That scar on your leg, for instance.  Quite large."
The redhead runs a finger along the crease in Caraco's calf.  "Yeah.  One of those big fish, I guess?"
Caraco stares up at her.  "You guess."
"That must have been a deep wound."  Mr. Canton again.  "Is it?"
"Is it what?"
"A souvenir from one of those famous monsters?"
"You don't have my medical records?"
"It would be easier if you'd save us the trouble of looking them up," the redhead explained.
"You in a hurry?"
Prodmaster takes a step forward.  "Not really.  We can wait.  But in the meantime, maybe we should get those eyecaps out."
"No."  The thought scares her to the core.  She's not sure why
"You don't need them any more, Ms. Caraco."  A smile, a civilized baring of teeth.  "You can relax.  You're on your way home."
"Fuck that.  They stay in."  She sits up, feels the leads tearing off her flesh.
Suddenly her arms are pinned.  Mr. Canton on one side, the redhead on the other.
"Fuck you."  She lashes out with one foot.  It goes low, catches Prodmasters' shock stick and flips it right out of the holster and onto the deck.  Prodmaster jumps back out of the cubby, leaving his weapon behind.  Suddenly Caraco's arms are free.  Mr. Canton and the redhead are backing right off, squeezing along the walls of the compartment as though desperate to avoid physical contact—
As well you might be, she thinks, grinning.  Don't try your cute little power games with me, assholes—
The oriental shakes his head, a mixture of sadness and disapproval.  Judy Caraco's body hums, right down in the bones, and goes completely limp.
She falls back onto the neoprene padding, nerves singing in the table's neuroinduction field.  She tries to move but all her motor synapses are shorted out.  The machines in her chest twitch and stutter, listening for orders, interpreting static.
Her lung sighs flat under its own weight.  She can't summon the strength to fill it up again.
They're tying her down.  Wrists, ankles, chest, all strapped and cinched back against the table.  She can't even blink.
The humming stops.  Air rushes down her throat and fills her chest.  It feels good to gasp again.  "How's her heart?" Prodmaster.
"Good.  Bit of defib at first, but okay now."
Mr. Canton bends over from the head of the table:  maggot skin stretched across a human face.  "It's okay, Ms. Caraco.  We're just here to help you.  Can you understand?"
She tries to talk.  It's an effort.   "g-g-g-g-G—O—."
"What?"
"Th-this is Scanlon's work.  Right?  S-Scanlon's fucking revenge."
Mr. Canton looks up at someone beyond Caraco's field of view.
"Industrial psych."  The redhead's voice.  "No one important."
He looks back down.  "Ms. Caraco, I don't know what you're talking about.  We're going to take your eyecaps out now.  It won't do you any good to struggle.  Just relax."
Hands hold her head in position.  Caraco clamps her eyes shut; they pry the left one open.  She stares into something like a big hypo with a disk on the end.  It settles on her eyecap, bonds with a faint sucking sound.
It pulls away.  Light floods in like acid.
She wrenches her head to one side and shuts her eye against the stinging.  Even filtered through her closed eyelid the light burns, an orange fire bringing tears.  Then they have her again, twisting her head forward, fumbling at her face—
"Turn the lights down, you idiot!  She's photosensitive!"
The redhead?
"—Sorry.  We kept them at half,  I thought—"
The light dims.  Her eyelids go black.
"Her irises haven't had to work for almost a year," the redhead snaps.   "Give her a chance to adjust, for Christ's sake."
She's in charge here?
Footsteps.  A rattle of instruments.
"Sorry about that, Ms. Caraco.  We've lowered the lights now, is that better?"
Go away.  Leave me alone.
"Ms. Caraco, I'm sorry, but we still have to remove your other cap."
She keeps her eyes squeezed shut.  They pull the cap out of her face anyway.  The straps loosen around her body, drop off.  She hears them backing away.
"Ms. Caraco, we've turned the lights down.  You can open your eyes."
The lights.  I don't care about the fucking lights.  She curls up on the table and buries her face in her hands.
"She doesn't look so tough now, does she?"
"Shut up, Burton.  You can be a real asshole sometimes, you know that?"
The sound of an airtight hatch hissing shut.  A dense, close silence settles on Caraco's eardrums.
An electrical hum.  "Judy."  the redhead's voice: not in person, this time.  From a speaker somewhere.  "We don't want this to be any worse than it has to be."
Caraco holds her knees tightly against her chest.  She can feel the scars there, a raised web of old tissue from the time they cut her open.  Eyes still shut, she runs her fingers along the ridges.
I want my eyes back.
But all she has now are these naked, fleshy things that anyone can see.  She opens them the merest crack, peeks between her fingers.  She's alone.
"We have to know some things, Judy.  For your own good.  We need to know how you found out." 
"Found out what?" she cries, her face in hands.  "I was just... exercising..."
"It's okay, Judy.  There's no hurry.  You can rest now, if you want.  Oh, and there are clothes in the drawer on your right."
She shakes her head.  She doesn't care about clothes, she's been naked in front of worse monsters than these.  It's only skin.
I want my eyes.




ALIBIS

Dead air from the speaker.
"Did you copy that?" Brander says after five seconds have passed.
"Yes.  Yes, of course."  The line hums for a second.  "It just comes as a bit of a shock, that's all.  It's just— very bad news."
Clarke frowns, and says nothing.
"Maybe she got detoured by a current at the thermocline,"  the speaker suggests.  "Or caught up in a Langmuir cell.  Are you sure she isn't still above the scattering layer somewhere?"
"Of course we're s—"  Nakata bursts out, and stops.  Ken Lubin has just laid a cautionary hand on her shoulder.
There's a moment's silence.
"It is night up there," Brander says finally.  The deep scattering layer rises with darkness, spreads thin near the surface until daylight chases it back down.  "And we'd be able to get her voice channel even if sonar couldn't get through.  But maybe we should go up there ourselves and look around."
"No.  That won't be necessary," says the speaker.  "In fact, it might be dangerous, until we know more about what happened to Caraco."
"So we don't even look for her?"  Nakata looks at the others, outrage and astonishment mingling on her face.  "She could be hurt, she could be—"
"Excuse me, Ms.—"
"Nakata!  Alice Nakata!  I can not believe—"
"Ms. Nakata, we are looking for her.  We've already scrambled a search team to scour the surface.  But you're in the middle of the Pacific Ocean.  You simply don't have the resources to cover the necessary volume."  A deep breath, carried flawlessly down four hundred kilometers of fiberop.  "On the other hand, if Ms. Caraco is at all mobile, she'll most likely try and make it back to Beebe.  If you want to search, your best odds are to look close to home."
Nakata looks helplessly around the room.  Lubin stands expressionless; after a moment he puts one finger to his lips.  Brander glances back and forth between them.
Lenie Clarke looks away.
"And you don't have any idea what might have happened to her?"  the GA  asks.
Brander grits his teeth.  "I said, some kind of sonar spike.  No detail.  We thought you might be able to tell us something."
"I'm sorry.  We don't know.  It's just unfortunate that she wandered so far from Beebe.  The ocean, it's— well, not always safe.  It's even possible a squid got her.  She was at the right depth."
Nakata's head is shaking.  "No,"  she whispers.
"Be sure and call if anything turns up," the speaker says.  "We're setting up the search plan now, so if there's nothing else—"
"There is," Lubin says.
"Oh?"
"There's an unmanned installation a few klicks northwest of us.  Recently installed."
"Really?"
"You don't know about it?"
"Hang on, I'm punching it up."  The speaker falls briefly silent.  "Got it.  My  God, that's way out of your back yard.  I'm surprised you even picked it up."
"What is it?"  Lubin says.  Clarke watches him, the hairs on her neck stirring.
"Seismology rig, it says here.  OSU put it down there for some study on natural radioactives and tectonics.  You should really keep away from it, it's a bit hot.  Carrying some calibration isotopes."
"Unshielded?"
"Apparently."
"Doesn't that scramble the onboard?" Lubin wants to know.  
Nakata stares at him, open-mouthed and angry.  "Who cares!  Judy's missing!"    
She's got a point.  Lubin barely even talks to the other rifters; coming from him, this interchange with the drybacks almost qualifies as babbling.
"Says here it's an optical processor," the speaker says after a brief pause.  "Radiation doesn't bother it.  But I think Al— Ms. Nakata is right, your first priority—"
Lubin reaches past Brander and kills the connection.
"Hey," Brander says sharply.
Nakata gives Lubin a blank angry stare and disappears from the hatchway.  Clarke hears her retreat into her cubby and dog the hatch.  Brander looks up at Lubin.  "Maybe it hasn't dawned on you, Ken, but Judy just might be dead.  We're kind of upset about that.  Alice especially." 
Lubin nods, expressionless.
"So I've got to wonder why  you chose this moment to grill the GA about the technical specs on a fucking seismic rig."
"That's not what it is," Lubin says.
"Yeah?"  Brander rises, twisting up out of the console chair.  "And just what—"
"Mike," says Clarke.
"What?"
She shakes her head.  "They said an optical CPU."
"So the fuck wh—"  Brander stops in mid-epithet.  Anger drains from his face.
"Not a gel," Clarke says.  "A chip.  That's what they're saying."
"But why lie to us?"  Brander asks,  "when we can just go out there and feel..."
"They don't know we can do that, remember?"  She lets out a little smile, like a secret shared between friends.  "They don't know anything about us.  All they've got is their files."
"Not any more," Brander reminds her.  "Now they've got Judy."
"They've got us too,"  Lubin adds.  "Quarantined."

#

"Alice.  It's me."
A soft voice through hard metal:  "Come..."  
Clarke pulls the hatch open, steps through.
Alice Nakata looks up from her pallet as the hatch sighs shut.  Almond eyes, dark and startling, reflect in the dimmed light.  One hand goes to her face:  "Oh.  Excuse me, I'll..."  She fumbles at the bedhead compartment, where her eyecaps float in plastic vials.
"Hey.  No problem."  Clarke reaches out, stops just short of touching Nakata's arm.  "I like your eyes, I've always— well..." 
"I should not be sulking in here anyway," Nakata says, rising.  "I'm going outside."
"Alice—"
"I am not going to just let her disappear out there.  Are you coming?"
Clarke sighs.  "Alice, the GA's right.  There's just too much volume.  If she's still out there, she knows where we are."
"If?  Where else would she be?"
Clarke looks at the deck, reviewing possibilities.
"I— I think the drybacks took her," she says at last.  "I think they'll take us, too, if we go after her."
Nakata stares at Clarke with disquieting human eyes.  "Why?  Why would they do that?"
"I don't know."
Nakata sags back on the pallet.  Clarke sits down beside her.
Neither woman speaks for a while.
"I'm sorry,"  Clarke says at last.  She doesn't know what else to say.  "We all are."
Alice Nakata stares at the floor.  Her eyes are bright, but not overflowing.  "Not all," she whispers.  "Ken seemed more interested in—"
"Ken had his reasons.  They're lying to us, Alice."
"They always lied to us," Nakata says softly, not looking up.  And then:  "I should have been there."
"Why?"
"I don't know.  If there'd been two of us, maybe..."
"Then we'd have lost both of you." 
"You don't know that.  Maybe it wasn't the drybacks at all, maybe she just ran into something... living."
Clarke doesn't speak.  She's heard the same stories Nakata has.  Confirmed reports of people getting eaten by Archie date back over a hundred years.  Not many, of course; humans and giant squid don't run into each other that often.  Even rifters swim too deep for such encounters.
	As a general rule.
"That's why I stopped going up with her, did you know that?"  Nakata shakes her head, remembering.  "We ran into something alive, up midwater.  It was horrible.  Some kind of jellyfish, I think.   It pulsed, and it had these thin watery tentacles that stretched out of sight, just hanging there in the water.  And it had all these— these stomachs.  Like fat squirming slugs.  And each one had its own mouth, and they were all opening and closing..."
Clarke screws up her face.  "Sounds lovely."
"I didn't even see it.  It was quite translucent, and I was not looking and I bumped into it and it started  ejecting pieces of itself.  The main body just went completely dark and pulled into itself and pulsed away and all these shed stomachs and mouths and tentacles were left behind, they were all glowing and writhing as though they were in pain..."
"I think I'd stop going up there too, after that."
"The strange thing was, I envied it in a way."  Nakata's eyes brim, spill over, but her voice doesn't change.  "It must be nice to just be able to— to cut yourself off from the parts that give you away."
Clarke smiles, imagining.  "Yes."  She realizes, suddenly, that only a few centimeters separate her from Alice Nakata.  They're almost touching.
How long have I been sitting here? she wonders.  She shifts on the pallet, pulls away out of habit. 
"Judy didn't see it that way," Nakata's saying.  "She felt sorry for the pieces.  I think she was almost angry with the main body, do you believe it?  She said it was this blind stupid blob, she said— what did she say— 'fucking typical bureaucracy, first sign of trouble it sacrifices the very parts that keep it fed.'  That's what she said."
Clarke smiles.  "That sounds like Judy."
"She never takes shit from anyone," Nakata says.  "She always fights back.  I like that about her, I could never do that.  When things get bad I just..."  She glances at the little black device stuck on the wall beside her pillow.  "I dream."
Clarke nods and says nothing.  She can't remember Alice Nakata ever being so talkative.   	"It's so much better than VR, you have much more control.  In VR you are stuck with someone else's dreams."
"So I hear." 
"You have never tried it?" Nakata asks.
"Lucid dreaming?  A couple of times.  I never got into it."
"No?"
Clarke shrugs.  "My dreams don't have much... detail."  Or too much, sometimes.  She nods at Nakata's machine.  "Those things wake me up just enough to notice how vague everything is.  Or sometimes, when there is any detail it's something really stupid.  Worms crawling through your skin or something."
"But you can control that.  That is the whole point.  You can change it."
In your dreams, maybe.  "But you have to see it first.  Just sort of spoiled the effect for me, I guess.  And mostly there were those big, vague gaps."
"Ah."  A flicker of a smile.  "For myself that is not a problem.  The world is pretty vague to me even when I am awake." 
"Well."  Clarke smiles back, tentatively. "Whatever works."
More silence.
"I just wish I knew,"  Nakata says finally.
"I know."
"You knew what happened to Karl.  It was bad, but you knew."
"Yes."
Nakata glances down.   Clarke follows, notices that her own hands have somehow clasped around Nakata's.  She supposes it's a gesture of support.  It feels okay.  She squeezes, gently.
Nakata looks back up.  Her dark naked eyes still startle, somehow.
"Lenie, she did not mind me.  I pulled away, and I dreamed, and sometimes I just went crazy and she put up with all of it.  She understoo— she understands."
"We're rifters, Alice."  Clarke hesitates, decides to risk it.  "We all understand."  
"Except Ken."
"You know, I think maybe Ken understands more than we give him credit for.  I don't think he meant to be insensitive before.  He's on our side."
"He is very strange.  He is not here for the same reason we are."
"And what reason is that?" Clarke asks.
"They put us here because this is where we belong," Nakata says, almost whispering.  "With Ken, I think—they just didn't dare put him anywhere else."

#

Brander's on his way downstairs when she gets back to the lounge.  "How's Alice?"
"Dreaming," Clarke says.  "She's okay."
"None of us are okay," Brander says.  "Borrowed time all around, you ask me."
She grunts.  "Where's Ken?"
"He left.  He's never coming back."
"What?"
"He went over.  Like Fischer."
"Bullshit. Ken's not like Fischer.  He's the farthest thing from Fischer."
"We know that."  Brander jerks a thumb at the ceiling.  "Theydon't.  He went over.  That's the story he wants us to sell upstairs, anyway."
"Why?"
"You think that motherfucker told me?  I agreed to play along for now, but I don't mind telling you I'm getting a bit tired of his bullshit."  Brander climbs down a rung, looks back.  "I'm heading back out myself.  Gonna check out the carousel.  I think some serious observations are in order."
"Want some company?"
Brander shrugs.  "Sure."
"Actually," Clarke remarks, "just company doesn't cut it any more, does it?  Maybe we'd better be, what's the word—"
"Allies," Brander says.
She nods.  "Allies."

Quarantine


BUBBLE
For a week now, Yves Scanlon's world had measured five meters by eight.  In all that time he had not seen another living soul.
There were plenty of ghosts, though.  Faces passed across his workstation, full of cheerful concern about his comfort, his diet, whether the latest gastrointestinal tap had made him uncomfortable.  There were poltergeists, too.  Sometimes they possessed the medical teleoperator that hung from the ceiling, made it dance and stab and steal slivers of flesh from Scanlon's body.  They spoke with many voices, but rarely said anything of substance. 
"It's probably nothing, Dr. Scanlon,"  the teleop said once, a talking exoskeleton.  "Just a preliminary report from Rand/Washington, some new pathogen on the rift... probably benign..."
Or, in a pleasant female voice:    "You're obviously in exc— good health, I'm sure there's nothing to worry about.  Still, you know how careful we have to be these days, even acne would mutate into a plague if we let it, heh heh heh— now we just another two c.c.'s..."
After a few days Scanlon had stopped asking.
Whatever it was, he knew it had to be serious.  The world was full of nasty microbes, new ones spawned by accident, old ones set free from dark corners of the world, common ones mutated into novel shapes.   Scanlon had been quarantined before a couple of times.  Most people had.  It usually involved technicians in body condoms, nurses trained to maintain spirits with a well-timed joke.  He'd never heard of everything being done by remote control before.
Maybe it was a security issue.  Maybe the GA didn't want the news leaking out, so they'd minimized the personnel involved.  Or maybe— maybe the potential danger was so great that they didn't want to risk live techs.
Every day Scanlon discovered some new symptom.  Shortness of breath.  Headaches.  Nausea.  He was astute enough to wonder if any of them were real.
It occurred to him, with increasing frequency, that he might not get out of there alive. 

#

Something resembling Patricia Rowan haunted his screen every now and then, asking questions about vampires.  Not even a ghost, really.  A simulation, masquerading as flesh and blood.  Its machinery showed through in subtle repetitions, derivative conversational loops, a fixation on keyword over concept.  Who was in charge down there, it wanted to know.  Did Clarke carry more weight than Lubin?  Did Brander carry more weight than Clarke?  As if anyone could glean the essence of those twisted, fantastic creatures with a few inept questions.  How many years had it taken Scanlon to achieve his level of expertise? 
It was rumored that Rowan didn't like real-time phone conversations.  Corpses were always paranoid about security or some such thing.  Still, it made Scanlon angry.  It was her fault that he was here now, after all.  Whatever he'd caught on the rift he'd caught because she'd ordered him down there, and now all she sent to him were puppets?  Did she really consider him that inconsequential? 
He never complained, of course.  His aggression was too passionately passive.  Instead, he toyed with the model she sent.  It was easy to fool, programmed to look for certain words and phrases in answers to any given question.   Just a trained dog, really, grabbing and fetching at the right set of commands.   It was only when it ran back home, eager jaws clamped around some utterly useless bit of trivia, that its master would realize how truly ambiguous certain key phrases could be...
He lost count of the times he sent it back, sated on junk food.  It kept returning, but it never learned.
He patted the teleop.  "You're probably smarter than that döppleganger of hers, you know.  Not that that's saying much.  But at least you get your pound of flesh on the first try."
Surely by now Rowan knew what he was doing.  Maybe this was some sort of game. Maybe, eventually, she'd admit defeat, come seek an audience in person.  That hope kept him playing.  Without it he would have given up and cooperated out of sheer boredom.

#

On the first day of his quarantine he'd asked one of the ghosts for a dreamer, and been refused.  Normal circadian metabolism was a prerequisite for one of the tests, it said; they didn't want his tissues cheating.  For several days after that Scanlon hadn't been able to sleep at all.  Then he'd fallen into a dreamless abyss for twenty-eight hours.  When he'd finally awakened his body had ached from an unremembered wave of microsurgical strikes. 
"Impatient little bastard, aren't you?" he'd murmured to the teleop.  "Can't even wait until I'm awake?  I hope it was good for you."  He'd kept his voice low, in case there were any active pickups in the room.  None of the workstation ghosts seemed to know anything about psychology; they were all physiologists and tinkertoy jocks.  If they'd caught him talking to a machine they might think he was going crazy.
Now he was sleeping a full nine hours daily.  Unpredictable attacks by the poltergeists cost him maybe an hour on top of that.  Crew reports and IPD profiles, none of which ever seemed to come from Beebe Station, appeared regularly in his terminal:  another four or five hours a day.
The rest of the time he watched television.
	Strange things happening out there.  A mysterious underwater explosion on the MidAtlantic Ridge, big enough for a nuke but no confirmation one way or the other.  Israel and Tanaka-Krueger had both recently reactivated their nuclear testing programs, but neither admitted to any knowledge of this particular blast.  The usual protests from corps and countries alike.  Things were getting even testier than usual.  Just the other day, it came out that N'AmPac, several weeks earlier, had responded to a relatively harmless bit of piracy on the part of a Korean muckraker by blowing it out of the water.
Regional news was just as troubling. An estimated three hundred dead after a firebomb took out most of the Urchin Shipyards outside Portland.  It was a fairly hefty death toll for two a.m.,  but Urchin property abutted the Strip and a number of refs had been caught in the firestorm.  No known motive.  Certain similarities to a much smaller explosion a few weeks earlier and a few hundred kilometers further north, in the Coquitlam Burb.  That one had been attributed to gang warfare.
And speaking of the Strip:  more unrest among refugees forever hemmed in along the coastline.   The usual rationale from the usual municipal entities.  Waterfront's the only available real estate these days, and besides, can you imagine what it would cost to install sewer systems for seven million if we let them come inland?
Another quarantine, this time over some nematode recently escaped from the headwaters of the Ivindo.  No news of anything from the North Pacific.  Nothing from Juan de Fuca. 
Two weeks into his sentence Scanlon realized that the symptoms he'd imagined earlier had all disappeared.  In fact, in a strange way he actually felt better than he had in years.  Still they kept him locked up.  There were more tests to be done.
Over time his initial sharp fears subsided to a chronic dull ache in the stomach, so diffuse he barely felt it any more.  One day he awoke with a sense of almost frantic relief.  Had he really ever thought that the GA might wall him away forever?  Had he really been so paranoid?  They were taking good care of him.  Naturally:  he was important to them.  He'd lost sight of that at first.  But the vampires were still problematic, or Rowan wouldn't be trolling her puppet through his workstation.  And the GA had chosen Yves Scanlon to study that problem because they knew he was the best man for the job.  Now they were just protecting their investment, making sure he was healthy.  He laughed out loud at that earlier panicky self.  There was really nothing to worry about.
Besides, he kept up with the news.  It was safer in here. 


ENEMA
He only spoke to it at night, of course.  
After the day's samples and scans, when it was folded up against the ceiling with its lights doused.  He didn't want the ghosts listening in.  Not that it embarrassed him to confide in a machine.  Scanlon knew far too much about human behavior to worry over such a harmless quirk.  Lonely end-users were always falling in love with VR simulations.  Programmers bonded with their own creations, instilling imaginary life into every utterly predictable response.  Hell, people even talked to their pillows if they were really short of alternatives.  The brain wasn't fooled, but the heart took comfort in the pretense.  It was perfectly natural, especially during periods of prolonged isolation.  Nothing to worry about at all. 
"They need me," Scanlon told it now, the ambient lighting damped down until he could barely see.  "I know vampires, I know them better than anyone.  I've lived with them.  I've survived them.  These, these drybacks up here only use them."  He looked up.  The teleop hung above him like a bat in the dim light, and didn't interact, and somehow that was the most comforting thing of all.
"I think Rowan's giving in.  Her puppet said she was going to try and find some time."
No answer.
Scanlon shook his head at the sleeping machine.  "I'm losing it, you know?  I'm turning into a complete brainstem, is what I'm doing."
He didn't admit it often these days.  Certainly not with the same sense of horror and uncertainty that he'd felt even a week before.  But after all he'd been through lately, it was only natural that he'd have some adjustments to make.  Here he was, quarantined, possibly infected by some unknown germ.  Before that he'd been through a gauntlet that would have driven most people right over the brink.  And before that...
Yes, he'd been through a lot.  But he was a professional.  He could still turn around, take a good hard look at himself.   More than most people could do.  Everyone had doubts and insecurities, after all.  The fact that he was strong enough to admit to his didn't make him a freak.  Quite the contrary.
Scanlon stared across to the far end of the room.  A window of isolation membrane stretched across the upper half of that wall, looked through to a small dark chamber that had been empty since his arrival.  Patricia Rowan would be there soon.  She would get first-hand benefit of Scanlon's new insights, and if she didn't already know how valuable he was, she'd be convinced  after he spoke to her.  The long wait for recognition was almost over.  Things were about to make a huge change for the better. 
Yves Scanlon reached up and touched a dormant metal claw.  "I like you better like this," he remarked.  "You're less... hostile.  
"I wonder who you'll sound like tomorrow..."

#
It sounded like some kid fresh out of grad school.  It acted like one, too.  It wanted him to drop his pants and bend over.
"Stuff it," Scanlon said at first, his public persona firmly in place.
"Exactly my intention," said the machine, wiggling a pencil-shaped probe on the end of one arm.  "Come on, Dr. Scanlon.  You know it's for your own good."
In fact he didn't know any such thing.  He'd been wondering lately if the indignities he suffered in here might be due entirely to some repressed asshole's misdirected sadism.  Just a few months ago it would have driven him crazy.  But Yves Scanlon was finally starting to see his place in the universe, and was discovering that he could afford to be tolerant.  Other people's pettiness didn't bother him nearly as much as it used to.  He was above it.
He did, however, stop to pull the curtain across the window before undoing his belt.  Rowan could show up at any time.
"Don't move," said the poltergeist.  "This won't hurt.  Some people even enjoy it."
Scanlon did not.  The realization came as a bit of a relief. 
"I don't see the hurry," he complained.  "Nothing goes in or out of me without you people turning a valve somewhere to let it past.  Why not just take what I send down the toilet?"
"We do that, too," the machine said, coring.  "Since you got here, in fact.  But you never know.  Some stuff degrades pretty quickly when it leaves a body."
"If it degrades that fast then why am I still in quarantine?"
"Hey, I didn't say it was harmless.  Just said it might have turned into something else.  Or maybe it is harmless.  Maybe you just pissed off someone upstairs."
Scanlon winced.  "The people upstairs like me just fine.  What are you looking for,  anyway?"
"Pyranosal RNA."
"I'm, I'm not sure I remember what that is." 
"No reason you should.  It's been out of fashion for three and a half billion years."
"No shit."
"Don't you wish."  The probe withdrew.  "It was all the rage in primordial times, until—"
"Excuse me," said Patricia Rowan's voice.
Scanlon glanced automatically over to the workstation.  She wasn't there.  The voice was coming from behind the curtain. 
"Ah.  Company.  I've got what I came for, anyway."  The arm swung around and neatly inserted the soiled probe into a dumbwaiter.  By the time Scanlon had his pants back up the teleop had folded into neutral.
"See you tomorrow,"  said the poltergeist, and fled.  The teleop's lights went out.
She was here.
Right in the next room.
Vindication was at hand.
Scanlon took a breath and pulled back the curtain.

#

Patricia Rowan stood in shadow on the other side.  Her eyes glittered with faint mercury:  almost vampire eyes, but diluted.  Translucent, not opaque.  
Her contacts, of course.  Scanlon had tried a similar pair once.  They linked into a weak RF signal from your watch, scrolled images across your field of view at a virtual range of forty centimeters.  Patricia Rowan saw Scanlon and smiled.  Whatever else she saw through those magical lenses, he could only guess. 
"Dr. Scanlon," she said.  "It's good to see you again."
He smiled back.  "I'm glad you came by.  We have a lot to talk about—"
Rowan nodded, opened her mouth.
"—and although your döpplegangers are perfectly adequate for normal conversation, they tend to lose a lot of the nuances—"
Closed it again.
"—especially given the kind of information you seem to be interested in."
Rowan hesitated a moment.  "Yes.  Of course.  We, um, we need your insights, Dr. Scanlon."  Yes.  Good.  Of course.  "Your report on Beebe was quite, well, interesting, but things have changed somewhat since you filed it."
He nodded thoughtfully.  "In what way?"
"Lubin's gone, for one thing."
"Gone?"
"Disappeared.  Dead, perhaps, although apparently there's no signal from his deadman.  Or possibly just— regressed, like Fischer."
"I see.  And have you learned whether anyone at the other stations has gone over?"  It was one of the predictions he'd made in his report.
Her eyes, rippling silver, seemed to stare at a point just beside his left shoulder.  "We can't really say.  Certainly we've had some losses,  but rifters tend not to be very forthcoming with details.  As we expected, of course."
"Yes, of course."  Scanlon tried on a contemplative look.  "So Lubin's gone.  Not surprising.  He was definitely closest to the edge.  In fact, if I remember I predicted—"
"Probably just as well," Rowan murmured.
"Excuse me?"
She shook her head, as if clearing it of some distraction.  "Nothing.  Sorry."
"Ah."  Scanlon nodded again.  No need to harp on Lubin if Rowan didn't want to.  He'd made lots of other predictions.  "There's also the matter of the Ganzfeld effect I noted.  The remaining crew—" 
"Yes, we've spoken with a couple of— other experts about that." 
"And?"
"They don't think the rift environment is, sufficiently impoverished is the way they put it.  Not sufficiently impoverished to function as a Ganzfeld."
"I see,"  Scanlon felt part of his old self bristling.  He smiled, ignoring it.  "How do they explain my observations?" 
"Actually—"  Rowan coughed.  "They're not completely convinced you did observe anything significant.  Apparently there was some evidence that your report was dictated under conditions of— well, personal stress."
Scanlon carefully froze his smile into place.  "Well.  Everyone's entitled to their opinion."
Rowan said nothing.
"Although the fact that the rift is a stressful environment shouldn't come as news to any real expert," Scanlon continued.  "That was the whole point of the program, after all."
Rowan nodded.  "I don't disbelieve you, Doctor.  I'm not really qualified to judge one way or the other."
True, he didn't say.
"And in any event," Rowan added, "You were there.  They weren't."
Scanlon relaxed.  Of course she'd put his opinion ahead of those other experts, whoever they were.  He was the one she'd chosen to go down there, after all. 
"It's not really important," she said now, dismissing the subject.  "Our immediate concern is the quarantine."
Mine as well as theirs.  But of course he didn't let that on.  It wouldn't be— professional— to seem too concerned about his own welfare right now.   Besides, they were treating him fine in here.  At least he knew what was going on.
"—yet,"  Rowan finished.
Scanlon blinked.  "What?  Excuse me?" 
"I said, for obvious reasons we've decided not to recall the crew from Beebe just yet."
"I see.  Well, you're in luck.  They don't want to leave."
Rowan stepped closer to the membrane.  Her eyes faded in the light.   "You're sure of this."
"Yes.  The rift is their home, Ms. Rowan, in a way a layperson probably couldn't understand.  They're more alive down there than they ever were on shore."  He shrugged.  "Besides, even if they wanted to leave, what could they do?  They're hardly going to swim all the way back to the mainland."
"They might, actually."
"What?"
"It's possible,"  Rowan admitted.  "Theoretically.  And we— we caught one of them, leaving."
"What?"
"Up in the euphotic zone.  We had a sub stationed up there, just to— keep an eye on things.  One of the rifters— Cracker, or—" a glowing thread wriggled across each eye— "Caraco, that's it.  Judy Caraco.  She was heading straight for the surface.  They figured she was making a break for it."
Scanlon shook his head.  "Caraco does laps, Ms. Rowan.  It was in my report."
"I know.  Perhaps your report should have been more widely distributed.  Although, her laps never took her that close to the surface before.  I can see why they—" Rowan shook her head.  "At any rate, they took her.  A mistake, perhaps."  A faint smile.  "Those happen, sometimes."
"I see," Scanlon said.
"So now we're in something of a situation,"  Rowan went on.  "Maybe the Beebe crew thinks that Caraco was just another accidental casualty.  Or maybe they're getting suspicious.  So do we let it lie, hope things blow over?  Will they make a break if they think we're covering something up?  Will some go and some stay?  Are they a group, or a collection of individuals?"
She fell silent.
"A lot of questions," Scanlon said after a while.
"Okay, then.  Here's just one.  Would they obey a direct order to stay on the rift?"
"They might stay on the rift," Scanlon said.  "But not because you ordered them to."
"We were thinking, maybe Lenie Clarke,"  Rowan said.  "According to your report she's more or less the leader.  And Lubin's— Lubin was— the wild card.  Now he's out of the picture, perhaps Clarke could keep the others in line.  If we can reach Clarke."
Scanlon shook his head.  "Clarke's not any sort of leader, not in the conventional sense.  She adopts her own behaviors independently, and the others just— follow her lead.  It's not the usual authority-based system as you'd understand it."
"But if they follow her lead, as you say..."
"I suppose," Scanlon said slowly, "she's the most likely to obey an order to stay on site, no matter how hellish the situation.  She's hooked on abusive relationships, after all."  He stopped.
"You could always try telling them the truth," he suggested. 
She nodded.  "It's a possibility, certainly.  And how do you think they'd react?"
Scanlon said nothing.
"Would they trust us?"  Rowan asked.
Scanlon smiled.  "Do they have any reason to?"
"Perhaps not."  Rowan sighed.  "But no matter what we tell, them, the issue's the same.  What will they do when they learn they're stuck down there?"
"Probably nothing.  That's where they want to be."
Rowan glanced at him curiously.  "I'm surprised you'd say that, Doctor."
"Why?"
"There's no place I'd rather be than my own apartment.  But the moment anyone put me under house arrest I'd want very much to leave it, and I'm not even slightly dysfunctional." 
Scanlon let the last part slide.  "That's a point," he admitted.
"A very basic one," she said.  "I'm surprised someone with your background would miss it."
"I didn't miss it.  I just think other factors outweigh it."  On the outside, Scanlon smiled.  "As you say, you're not at all dysfunctional."
"No.  Not yet, anyway."  Rowan's eyes clouded with a sudden flurry of data.  She stared into space for a moment or two, assessing. "Excuse me.  Bit of trouble on another front."  She focused again on Scanlon.  "Do you ever fell guilty, Yves?"
He laughed, cut himself off.  "Guilty?  Why?"
"About the project.  About— what we did to them."
"They're happier down there.  Believe me.  I know."
"Do you."
"Better than anyone, Ms. Rowan.  You know that.  That's why you came to me today."
She didn't speak.
"Besides," Scanlon said, "Nobody drafted them.  It was their own free choice."
"Yes,"  Rowan agreed softly.  "Was."
And extended her arm through the window.
The isolation membrane coated her hand like liquid glass.  It fit the contours of her fingers without a wrinkle, painted palm and wrist and forearm in a transparent sheath, pulled away just short of her elbow and stretched back to the windowpane.
"Thanks for your time, Yves," Rowan said.
After a moment Scanlon shook the proffered hand.  It felt like a condom, slightly lubricated.  "You're welcome," he said.  Rowan retracted her arm, turned away.  The membrane smoothed behind her like a soap bubble.
"But—" Scanlon said.
She turned back.  "Yes?"
"Was that all you wanted?" he said.
"For now."
"Ms. Rowan, if I may.  There's a lot about the people down there you don't know.  A lot.  I'm the only one who can give it to you."
"I appreciate that, Y—"
"The whole geothermal program hinges on them.  I'm sure you see that."
She stepped back towards the membrane.   "I do, Dr. Scanlon.  Believe me.  But I have a number of priorities right now.  And in the meantime, I know where to find you."  Once more she turned away.
Scanlon tried very hard to keep his voice level:  "Ms.  Rowan—"
Something changed in her then, a subtle hardening of posture that would have gone unnoticed by most people.  Scanlon saw it as she turned back to face him.  A tiny pit opened in his stomach.
He tried to think of what to say.
"Yes, Dr. Scanlon," she said, her voice a bit too level.
"I know you're busy, Ms. Rowan, but— how much longer do I have to stay in here?"
She softened fractionally.  "Yves, we still don't know.  In a way it's just another quarantine, but it's taking longer to get a handle on this one.  It's from the bottom of the ocean, after all."
"What is it, exactly?"
"I'm not a biologist."  She glanced at the floor for a moment, then met his eyes again.  "But I can tell you this much:  you don't have to worry about keeling over dead.  Even if you have this thing.  It doesn't really attack people."
"Then why—"
"Apparently there are some— agricultural concerns.  They're more afraid of the effect it might have on certain plants."
He considered that.  It made him feel a little better.		
	"I really have to go now."  Rowan seemed to consider something for a moment, then added,  "And no more döpplegangers.  I promise.  That was rude of me."



TURNCOAT
She'd told the truth about the döppelgangers.   She'd lied about everything else.
After four days Scanlon left a message in Rowan's cache.  Two days later he left another. In the meantime he waited for the spirit which had thrust its finger up its ass to come back and tell him more about primordial biochemistry.  It never did.   By now even the other ghosts weren't visiting very often, and they barely said a word when they did.
Rowan didn't return Scanlon's calls.  Patience melted into uncertainty.  Uncertainty simmered into conviction.  Conviction began to gently boil.
Locked up in here for three fucking weeks and all she gives me is a ten-minute courtesy call.  Ten lousy minutes of my-experts-say-you're-wrong and it's-such-a-basic-point-I-can't-believe-you-missed-it and then she just walks away.  She just fucking smiles and walks away.  
"Know what I should have done," he growled at the teleop.  It was the middle of the day but he didn't care any more.  Nobody was listening, they'd deserted him in here.  They'd probably forgotten all about him.  "What I should have done is rip a hole in that fucking membrane when she was here.  Let a little of whatever's in here out to mix with the air in her lungs.  Bet that'd inspire her to look for some answers!"
He knew it was fantasy.  The membrane was almost infinitely flexible, and just as tough. Even if he succeeded in cutting it, it would repair itself before any mere gas molecules could jump through.  Still, it was satisfying to think about.
Not satisfying enough.  Scanlon picked up a chair and hurled it at the window.  The membrane caught it like a form-fitting glove, enfolded it, let it fall almost to the floor on the other side.  Then, slowly, the window tightened down to two dimensions.  The chair toppled back into Scanlon's cell, completely undamaged.
And to think she'd had the fucking temerity to lecture him with that inane little homily about house arrest!  As though she'd caught him in some sort of lie, when he'd suggested the vampires might stay put.  As though she thought he was covering for them.
Sure, he knew more about vampires than anyone.  That didn't mean he was one.  That didn't mean—
We could have treated you better, Lubin had said, there at the last.  We.  As though he'd been speaking for all of them.  As though, finally, they were accepting him.  As though—
But vampires were damaged goods, always had been.  That was the whole point.   How could Yves Scanlon qualify for membership in a club like that?
He knew one thing, though.  He'd rather be a vampire than one of these assholes up here.  That was obvious now.  Now that the pretenses were dropping away and they didn't even bother talking to him any more.  They exploited him and then they shunned him, they used him just like they used the vampires.  He'd always known that deep down, of course.  But he'd tried to deny it, kept it stifled under years of accommodation and good intentions and misguided efforts to fit in. 
These people were the enemy.  They'd always been the enemy.
And they had him by the balls.
He spun around and slammed his fist into the examination table.  It didn't even hurt.  He continued until it did.  Panting,  knuckles raw and stinging, he looked around for something else to smash.
The teleop woke up enough to hiss and spark when the chair bounced off its central trunk.  One of the arms wiggled spastically for a moment.  A faint smell of burnt insulation.  Then nothing.  Only slightly dented, the teleop slept on above a litter of broken paradigms.
"Tip for the day," Scanlon snarled at it.  "Never trust a dryback."	

Head Cheese


THEME AND VARIATION
A tremor shivers through bedrock.  The emerald grid fractures into a jagged spiderweb.  Strands of laser light bounce haphazardly into the abyss.
From somewhere within the carousel, a subtle discontent.  Intensified cogitation.  The displaced beams waver, begin realigning themselves.
Lenie Clarke has seen and felt all of this before.  This time she watches the prisms on the seabed, rotating and adjusting themselves like tiny radio-telescopes.  One by one the disturbed beams lie back down, parallel, perpendicular, planar.  Within seconds the grid is completely restored. 
Emotionless satisfaction.  Cold alien thoughts nearby, reverting.
And further away, something else coming closer.  Thin and hungry, like a faint reedy howl in Clarke's mind...
"Ah, shit," Brander buzzes, diving for the bottom.
It streaks down from the darkness overhead,  mindlessly singleminded, big as Clarke and Brander put together.   Its eyes reflect the glow from the seabed.  It slams into the top of the carousel, mouth open, bounces away with half its teeth broken.
It has no thoughts, but Lenie Clarke can feel its emotions.  They don't change.  Injury never seems to faze these monsters.  Its next attack targets one of the lasers.  It skids around the roof of the carousel and comes up from underneath, swallowing one of the beams.  It rams the emitter, and thrashes.
A sudden vicarious tingle shoots along Clarke's  spine.  The creature sinks, twitching.  Clarke feels it die before it touches bottom. 
"Jesus," she says. "You sure the laser didn't do that?"
"No.  Way too weak," Brander tells her.  "Didn't you feel it?  An electric shock?" 
She nods. 
"Hey," Brander realizes.  "You haven't seen this before, have you?"
"No.  Alice told me about it, though."
"The lasers lure them in sometimes, when they wobble."
Clarke eyes the carcass.  Neurons hiss faintly inside it.  The body's dead, but it can take hours for the cells to run down.  
She glances back at the machinery that killed them.  "Lucky none of us touched that thing," she buzzes.
"I was keeping my distance anyway.  Lubin said it wasn't hot enough to be dangerous, but, well..."
"I was tuned in to the gel, when it happened," she says.  "I don't think it—"
"The gel never even notices.  I don't think it's hooked into the defense system."  Brander looks up at the metal structure.  "No, our head cheese has far too much on its mind to waste its time worrying about fish."
She looks at him.  "You know what it is, don't you?"
"I don't know.  Maybe." 
"Well?"
"I said I don't know.  Just got some ideas." 
"Come on, Mike.  If you've got ideas, it's only because the rest of us have been out here taking notes for the past two weeks.  Give."
He floats above her, looking down.  "Okay," he says at last.  "Let me just dump what you got today and run it against the rest.  Then, if it pans out..."
"About time."  Clarke grabs her squid off the bottom and tweaks the throttle.  "Good."
Brander shakes his head.  "I don't think so.  Not at all."

#

"Okay, then.  Smart gels are especially suited for coping with rapid changes in topography, right?"
Brander sits at the library.  In front of him, one of the flatscreens cycles through a holding pattern.  Behind, Clarke and Lubin and Nakata do the same.
"So there are two ways for your topographic environment to change rapidly," he continues.  "One, you move quickly through complex surroundings.  That's why we're getting gels in muckrakers and ATVs these days.  Or you could sit still, and let your surroundings change."
He looks around.  Nobody says anything.  "Well?"
"So it's thinking about earthquakes," Lubin remarks.  "The GA told us that much."
Brander turns back to the console.  "Not just any earthquake,"  he says, a sudden edge in his voice.  "The same earthquake.  Over and over again."
He touches an icon on the screen.  The display rearranges itself  into a pair of axes, x and y.  Emerald script glows adjacent to each line.  Clarke leans forward:  time, says the abscissa.  Activity, says the ordinate.
A line begins to crawl left to right across the display.
"This is a mean composite plot of every time we ever watched that thing," Brander explains.  "I tried to pin some sort of units onto the y-axis, but of course all we can tune in is now it's thinking hard, or now it's slacking off.  So you'll have to settle for a relative scale.  What you're seeing now is just baseline activity."
The line shoots about a quarter of the way up the scale, flattens out.
"Here it's started thinking about something.  I can't correlate this to any real events like local tremors, it just seems to start on its own.  An internally-generated loop, I think."
"Simulation," Lubin grunts.
"So it's thinking along like this for a while," Brander continues, ignoring him, "and then, voila..."  Another jump, to halfway up the y-axis.  The line holds its new altitude for a few pixels, slides into a gentle decline for a pixel or two, then jumps again.  "So here it started thinking quite hard, starts to relax, then starts thinking even harder."  Another, smaller jump, another gradual decline.  "Here it's even more lost in thought, but it takes a nice long break afterwards."  Sure enough, the decline continues uninterrupted for almost thirty seconds.
"And right about now…"
The line shoots almost to the top of the scale, fluctuates near the top of the graph.  "And here it just about gives itself a hemorrhage.  It goes on for a while, then—"
The line plummets vertically.
"—drops right back to baseline.  Then there's some minor noise, I think it's storing its results or updating its files or something, and the whole thing starts all over again."  Brander leans back in his chair, regards the rest with his hands clasped behind his head.  "That's all it's been doing.  As long as we've been watching it.  The whole cycle takes about fifteen minutes, give or take."
"That's it?" Lubin says.
"Some interesting variations, but that's the basic pattern."
"So what does it mean?"  Clarke asks.
Brander leans forward again, towards the library.  "Suppose you were an earthquake tremor, starting here on the rift and propagating east.  Guess how many faults you'd have to cross to get to the mainland."
Lubin nods and says nothing.
Clarke eyes the graph, guesses:  five.
Nakata doesn't even blink, but then, Nakata hasn't done much of anything for days.
Brander points to the first jump.  "Us.  Channer Vent."  The second:  "Juan de Fuca, Coaxial Segment."  Third: "Juan de Fuca, Endeavour Segment."  Fourth:  "Beltz minifrac."  The last and largest:  "Cascadia Subduction Zone."  
He waits for their reaction.  Nobody says anything.  Faintly, from outside, comes the sound of windchimes in mourning.
"Jesus.  Look, any simulation is computationally most intensive whenever the number of possible outcomes is greatest.  When a tremor crosses a fault it triggers ancillary waves perpendicular to the main direction of travel.  Makes for very hairy calculations at those points, if you're trying to model the process."
Clarke stares at the screen.  "Are you sure about this?"
"Christ, Len, I'm basing it on stray emissions from a blob of fucking nerve tissue.  Of course I'm not sure.  But I'll tell you this much:  if  you assume that this first jump represents the initial quake, and this last dropoff is the mainland, and you also assume a reasonably constant speed of propagation, these intermediate spikes fall almost exactly where Cobb, Beltz, and Cascadia would be.  I don't think that's a coincidence."
Clarke frowns.  "But doesn't that mean the model stops running as soon as it reaches N'AmPac?  I would've thought that's when they'd be most interested."
Brander bites his lip.  "Well, that's the thing.  The lower the activity near the end of a run, the longer the run seems to last." 
She waits.  She doesn't have to ask.  Brander's far too proud of himself to not explain further.  
"And if you assume that lower end-run activity reflects a smaller predicted quake, the cheese spends more time thinking about quakes with lower shoreline impact.  Usually, though, it just stops when it hits the coast."
"There's a threshold," Lubin says.
"What?"
"Every time it predicts a coastal quake above a certain threshold, the model shuts down and starts over.  Unacceptable losses.  It spends more time thinking about the milder ones, but so far they've all resulted in unacceptable losses."
Brander nods, slowly.  "I was wondering about that."
"Stop wondering."  Lubin's voice is even more dead than usual.  "That thing's only got one question on its mind."
"What question?"  Clarke asks.
"Lubin, you're being paranoid," Brander snorts.  "Just because it's a bit radioactive—"
"They lied to us.   They took Judy.  Even you're not naive enough —"
"What question?" Clarke asks again.
"But why?"  Brander demands.  "What would be the point?"
"Mike,"  Clarke says, softly and clearly, "shut up."
Brander blinks and falls silent.  Clarke turns to Lubin.  "What question?"
"It's watching the local plates.  It's asking, what happens on N'AmPac if there's an earthquake here, right now?" Lubin parts his lips in an expression few would mistake for a smile.  "So far it hasn't liked the answer.  But sooner or later predicted impact's going to fall below some critical level."
"And then what?" Clarke says.  As if I didn't know.
"Then it blows up," says a small voice.  
Alice Nakata is talking again.



GROUND ZERO

Nobody speaks for a long time.
"That's insane," Lenie Clarke says at last.
Lubin shrugs. 
"So you're saying it's some kind of a bomb?"
He nods.
"A bomb big enough to cause a major earthquake three, four hundred kilometers away?"
"No," Nakata says.  "All of those faults it would have to cross, they would stop it.  Firewalls."	
"Unless," Lubin adds, "one of those faults is just about ready to slip on its own."
Cascadia.  Nobody says it aloud.  Nobody has to.  One day, five hundred years ago, the Juan de Fuca Plate developed an attitude.  It got tired of being endlessly ground under North America's heel.  So it just stopped sliding, hung on by its fingernails and dared the rest of the world to shake it free.  So far the rest of the world hasn't been able to.  But the pressure's been building now for half a millennium.  It's only a matter of time.
When Cascadia lets go, a lot of maps are going to end up in recyc. 
Clarke looks at Lubin.  "You're saying even a small bomb here could kick Cascadia loose.  You're saying the big one, right?"
"That's what he's saying,"  Brander confirms.  "So why, Ken old buddy?  This some sort of Asian real estate scam?  A terrorist attack on N'AmPac?"
"Wait a minute."  Clarke holds up a hand.  "They're not trying to cause an earthquake.  They're trying to avoid one."
Lubin nods.  "You set off a fusion charge on the rift, you trigger a quake.  Period.  How serious depends on conditions at detonation.  This thing is just holding itself back until it causes as little damage as possible, back on shore."
Brander snorts.  "Come on, Lubin, isn't this all kind of excessive?  If they wanted to take us out, why not just come down here and shoot us?"
Lubin looks at him, empty-eyed.  "I don't believe you're that stupid, Mike.  Perhaps you're just in denial."
Brander rises out of his chair.  "Listen, Ken—"
"It's not us,"  Clarke says.  "It's not just us.  Is it?"
Lubin shakes his head, not taking his eyes off Brander.
"They want to take out everything.  The whole rift."
Lubin nods.
"Why?"
"I don't know,"  Lubin says.  "Perhaps we could ask them."
Figures,  Clarke muses.  I just never get a break.
Brander sinks back into his chair.  "What are you smiling at?"
Clarke shakes her head.  "Nothing."
"We must do something," Nakata says,
"No shit, Alice."  Brander looks back at Clarke.  "Any ideas?"
Clarke shrugs.  "How long do we have?"
"If Lubin's right, who knows?  Tomorrow, maybe.  Ten years from now.  Earthquakes are classic chaotic systems, and the tectonics around here change by the minute.  If the Throat slips a millimeter it could make the difference between a shiver and a meltdown."
"Perhaps it is a small-yield device,"  Nakata suggests hopefully.  "It is a ways away, and all this water might damp down the shock wave before it reaches us?"
"No," Lubin says.
"But we do not know—"
"Alice," Brander says, "It's almost two hundred kilometers to Cascadia.  If this thing can generate P-waves strong enough to kick it loose at that range, we're not going to ride it out here.  We might not get vaporized, but the shockwave would tear us into little pieces."
"Perhaps we can disable it somehow,"  Clarke says.
"No."  Lubin is flat and emphatic.
"Why not?"  Brander says.
"Even if we get past its front-line defense, we're only seeing the top of the structure.  The vitals are buried."
"If we can get in at the top, there might be access—"
"Chances are it's set for damped detonation if tampered with," Lubin says.  "And there are others we haven't found."
Brander looks up.  "And how do you know that?"
"There have to be.  At this depth it would take almost three hundred megatons to generate a bubble even half a kilometer across.  If they want to take out any significant fraction of the vent, they'll need multiple charges, distributed." 
There's a moment's silence.  
"Three hundred megatons," Brander repeats at last.  "You know, I can't tell you how disturbed I am to find that you know such things."
Lubin shrugs.  "It's basic physics.  It shouldn't intimidate anyone who isn't totally innumerate."
Brander is standing again, his face only centimeters from Lubin's.
"And I am getting pretty fucking disturbed by you too, Lubin," he says through clenched teeth, "Who the fuck are you, anyway?"
"Mike," Clarke begins.
"No, I fucking mean it.  We don't know shit about you, Lubin.  We can't tune you in, we sell your bullshit story to the drybacks for you and you still haven't explained why, and now you're mouthing off like some kind of fucking secret agent.  You want to call the shots, say so.  Just drop this bullshit man-with-no-name  routine."
Clarke takes a small step back.  Okay.  Fine.  If he thinks he can fuck with Lubin he's on his own.
But Lubin isn't showing any of the signs.  No change in stance, no change in breathing, his hands stay unclenched at his sides.  When he speaks, his voice is calm and even.  "If it'll make you feel any better, by all means; call upstairs and tell them I'm still alive.  Tell them you lied.  If they"
The eyes don't change.  That flat white stare persists while the flesh around it twitches, suddenly, and now Clarke can see the signs, the slight lean forward, the subtle cording of veins and tendons in the throat.  Brander sees them too.  He's standing still as a dog caught in headlights.
Fuck fuck fuck he's going to blow...
But she's wrong again.  Impossibly, Lubin relaxes.  "As for your endearing desire to get to know me,"  —laying a casual hand on Brander's shoulder— "you're luckier than you know that that hasn't happened."
Lubin takes back his hand, steps towards the ladder.  "I'll go along with whatever you decide, as long as it doesn't involve tampering with nuclear explosives.  In the meantime, I'm going outside.  It's getting close in here."
He drops through the floor.  Nobody else moves.   The sound of the airlock flooding seems especially loud.
"Jesus, Mike," Lenie breathes at last.
"Since when was he calling the shots?"  Brander seems to have regained some of his bravado.  He casts a hostile glance through the deck.  "I don't trust that fucker.  No matter what he says.  Probably tuning us in right now."
"If he is, I doubt he's picking up anything you haven't already shouted at him."
"Listen," says Nakata.  "We must do something."
Brander throws his hands in the air.  "What choice is there?  If we don't disarm the fucking thing, we either get the hell out of here or we sit around and wait to get incinerated.  Not really a tough decision if you ask me."
Isn't it, Clarke wonders.
"We cannot leave by the surface," Nakata points out, "if they got Judy..."
"So we hug the bottom," Brander says.  "Right.  Scam their sonar.  We'd have to leave the squids behind, they'd be too easy to track."
Nakata nods.
"Lenie?  What?"
Clarke looks up.  Brander and Nakata are both staring at her.  "I didn't say anything."
"You look like you don't approve."
"It's three hundred klicks to Vancouver Island, Mike.  Minimum.  It could take over a week to make it without squids, assuming we don't get lost."
"Our compasses work fine once we're away from the rift.    And it's a pretty big continent, Len; we'd have to try pretty hard not to bump into it."
"And what do we do when we get there?  How would we make it past the Strip?"
Brander shrugs.  "Sure.  For all we know the refs could eat us alive, if our tubes don't choke on all the shit floating around back there.  But really, Len, would you rather take your chances with a ticking nuke?  It's not like we're drowning in options."
"Sure."  Clarke moves one hand in a gesture of surrender.  "Fine."
"Your problem, Len, is you've always been a fatalist," Brander pronounces.
She has to smile at that.  Not always.
"There is also the question of food,"  Nakata says.  "To bring enough for the trip will slow us considerably."
I don't want to leave, Clarke realizes.  Even now.  Isn't that stupid.
"—don't think speed is much of a concern," Brander is saying.  "If this thing goes off in the next few days an few extra meters per hour won't to do us much good anyway."
"We could travel light and forage on the way," Clarke muses, her mind wandering. "Gerry does okay."
"Gerry," Brander repeats, suddenly subdued.
A moment's silence.  Beebe shivers with the small distant cry of Lubin's memorial.
"Oh God," Brander says softly.  "That thing can really get on your nerves after a while."



SOFTWARE
There was a sound.
Not a voice.  It had been days since he'd heard any voice but his own.  Not the food dispenser or the toilet.  Not the familiar crunch of his feet over dismembered machinery.  Not even the sound of breaking plastic or the clang of metal under assault;  he'd already destroyed everything he could, given up on the rest.
No, this was something else.  A hissing sound.  It took him a few moments to remember what it was. 
The access hatch, pressurizing.
He craned his neck until he could see around the corner of an intervening  cabinet.  The usual red light glowed from the wall to one side of the big metal ellipse.  It turned green as he watched. 
The hatch swung open.  Two men in body condoms stepped through, light from behind throwing their shadows along the length of the dark room.  They looked around, not seeing him at first.  
One of them turned up the lights.
Scanlon squinted up from the corner.  The men were wearing sidearms.  They looked down at him for a few moments,  folds of isolation membrane draped around their faces like leprous skin.
Scanlon sighed and pulled himself to his feet.  Fragments of  bruised technology tinkled to the floor.  The guards stood aside to let him pass.  Without a word they followed him back outside.

#

Another room.  A strip of light divided it into two dark halves.  It speared down from a recessed groove in the ceiling, bisecting the wine draperies and the carpet, laying a bright band across the conference table.  Tiny bright hyphens reflected from perspex workpads set into the mahogany. 
A line in the sand.  Patricia Rowan stood well back on the other side, her face half-lit in profile.
"Nice room," Scanlon remarked.  "Does this mean I'm out of quarantine?"
Rowan didn't face him.  "I'm afraid I'll have to ask you to stay on your side of the light.  For your own safety."
"Not yours?" 
Rowan gestured at the light without looking. "Microwave.  UV too, I think.  You'd fry if you crossed it."
"Ah.  Well, maybe you've been right all along."  Scanlon pulled a chair out from the conference table and sat down.  "I developed a real symptom the other day.  My stools seem a bit off.  Intestinal flora not working properly, I guess." 
"I'm sorry to hear it."
"I thought you'd be pleased.  It's the closest thing to vindication you've got to date."
Neither person spoke for nearly a minute.  
"I... I wanted to talk,"  Rowan said at last.
"So did I.  A couple of weeks ago."  And then, when she didn't respond:  "Why now?" 
"You're a therapist, aren't you?"
"Neurocognitist.  And we haven't talked, as you put it, for decades.  We prescribe."
She lowered her face.
"You see, I have," she began.
"Blood on my hands," she said a moment later.
I bet I know whose, too.  "Then you really don't want me.  You want a priest."
"They don't talk either.  At least, they don't say much."
The curtain of light hummed softly, like a bug zapper. 
"Pyranosal RNA," Scanlon said after a moment.  "Five-sided ribose ring.  A precursor to modern nucleic acids, pretty widespread about three and a half billion years ago.  The library says it would've made a perfectly acceptable genetic template on its own; faster replication than DNA, fewer replication errors.  Never caught on, though."
Rowan said nothing.  She may have nodded, but it was hard to tell.
"So much for your story about an agricultural hazard.  So are you finally going to tell me what's going on, or are you still into role-playing games?" 
Rowan shook herself, as though coming back from somewhere.  For the first time, she looked directly at Scanlon.  The sterilight reflected off her forehead, buried her eyes in black pools of shadow.   Her contacts shimmered like back-lit platinum.
She didn't seem to notice his condition.
"I didn't lie to you, Dr. Scanlon.  Fundamentally, you could call this an agricultural problem.   We're dealing with sort of a— a soil bacterium.  It’s not a pathogen at all, really.  It’s just— a competitor.  And no, it never caught on.  But as it turns out, it never really died off, either."
She dropped into a chair.
"Do you know what the really shitty thing is about all this?  We could let you go right now and it's entirely possible that everything would be fine.  It's almost certain, in fact.  One in a thousand chance we'd regret it, they say.  Maybe one in ten thousand."
"Pretty good odds," Scanlon agreed.  "What's the punchline?"
"Not good enough.  We can't take the chance."
"You take a bigger risk every time you step outside."
Rowan sighed.  "And people play lotteries with odds of one in a million, all the time.  But Russian Roulette's got much better odds than that, and you won't find too many people taking their chances at it."
"Different payoffs." 
"Yes.  The payoffs."  Rowan shook her head; in some strange abstract way she seemed almost amused.  "Cost-benefit analysis, Yves.  Maximum likelihood.  Risk assessment.  The lower the risk, the more sense it makes to play." 
"And the reverse," Scanlon said.
"Yes. Of course.  The reverse."
"Must be pretty bad," he said, "to turn down ten-thousand-to-one odds."
"Oh yes."  She didn't look at him.
He'd been expecting it, of course.  The bottom dropped out of his stomach anyway.
"Let me guess," he said.  He couldn't seem to keep his voice level.  "N'AmPac's at risk if I go free."
"Worse," she said, very softly.
"Ah.  Worse than N'AmPac.  Okay, then.  The human race.  The whole human race goes belly up if I so much as sneeze out of doors."
"Worse," she repeated.
She's lying.  She has to be.  She's just a refsucking dryback cunt. Find her angle.  
Scanlon opened his mouth.  No words came out.
He tried again.  "Hell of a soil bacterium."  His voice sounded as thin as the silence that followed.
"In some ways, actually, it's more like a virus," she said at last.  "God, Yves, we're still not really sure what it is.  It's old, older than the Archaea, even.  But you've figured that out for yourself.  A lot of the details are beyond me."
Scanlon giggled.  "Details are beyond you?"  His voice swerved up an octave, dropped again.  "You lock me up for all this time and now you tell me I'm stuck here forever— I assume that's what you're about to tell me—" the words tumbled out too quickly for her to disagree— "and you just don't have a head to remember the details?  Oh, that's okay, Ms. Rowan, why should I want to hear about those?"
Rowan didn't answer directly.  "There's a theory that life got started in rift vents.  All life.  Did you know that, Yves?"
He shook his head.  What the hell is she going on about? 
"Two prototypes," Rowan continued.  "Three, four billion years ago.  Two competing models.  One of them cornered the market, set the standard for everything from viruses up to giant sequoias.  But the thing is, Yves, the winner wasn't necessarily the best product.  It just got lucky somehow, got some early momentum.  Like software, you know?   The best programs never end up as industry standards."
She took a breath.  "We're not the best either, apparently.  The best never got off the ocean floor."
"And it's in me now?  I'm some sort of Patient Zero?"  Scanlon shook his head.  "No.  It's impossible." 
"Yves—" 
"It's just the deep sea.  It's not outer space, for God's sake.  There's currents, there's circulation, it would have come up a hundred million years ago, it'd be everywhere already."
Rowan shook her head.
"Don't tell me that!  You're a fucking corpse, you don't know anything about biology!  You said so yourself!"
Suddenly Rowan was staring directly through him.  "An actively maintained hypo-osmotic intracellular environment," she intoned.  "Potassium, calcium, and chlorine ions all maintained at concentrations of less than five millimoles per kilogram."  Tiny snowstorms gusted across her pupils.  "The consequent strong osmotic gradient, coupled with high bilayer porosity,  results in extremely efficient assimilation of nitrogenous compounds.  However, it also limits distribution in aqueous environments with salinity in excess of twenty parts-per-thousand, due to the high cost of osmoregulation.  Thermal elev—"
"Shut up!"
Rowan fell immediately silent, her eyes dimming slightly.
"You don't know what the fuck you just said,"  Scanlon spat.  "You're just reading off that built-in teleprompter of yours.  You don't have a clue."
"They're leaky, Yves."  Her voice was softer now.  "It gives them a huge edge at nutrient assimilation, but it backfires in salt water because they have to spend so much energy osmoregulating.  They have to keep their metabolism on high or they shrivel up like raisins.  And metabolic rate rises and falls with the ambient temperature, do you follow?"
He looked at her, surprised.  "They need heat.  They die if they leave the rift." 
Rowan nodded.  "It takes a while, even at four degrees.  Most of them just keep way down in the vents where it's always warm, and they can survive cold spells between eruptions anyway.  But deep circulation is so slow, you see, if they leave one rift they die long before they find another."  She took a deep breath.  "But if they got past that, do you see?  If they got into an environment that wasn't quite so salty, or even one that wasn't quite so cold, they'd get their edge back.  It would be like trying to compete for your dinner with something that eats ten times faster than you do."
"Right.  I'm carrying Armageddon around inside me.   Come on, Rowan.  What do you take me for?  This thing evolved on the bottom of the ocean and it can just hop into a human body and hitch-hike to the big city?"
"Your blood is warm." Rowan stared at her half of the table.  "And not nearly as salty as seawater.  This thing actually prefers the inside of a body.  It's been in the fish down there for ages, that's why they get so big sometimes.  Some sort of— intracellular symbiosis, apparently."
"Fine.  What about the, the pressure difference then?  How can something that evolved under four hundred atmospheres survive at sea level?" 
	She didn't have an answer for that one at first.  After a moment a faint spark lit her eyes.  "It's better off up here than down there, actually.  High pressure inhibits most of the enzymes involved in metabolism."
"So why aren't I sick?"
"As I said, it's— efficient.  Any body contains enough trace elements to keep it going for a while.  It doesn't take much.  Eventually, they say, your bones will get— brittle—"
"That's it?  That's the threat?  A plague of osteoporosis?"  Scanlon laughed aloud.  "Well, bring on the exterminators, by all—"
The sound of Rowan's hand hitting the table was very loud.
"Let me tell you what happens if this thing gets out," she said quietly.  "First off, nothing.  We outnumber it, you see.  At first we swamp it through sheer numbers, the models predict all sorts of skirmishes and false starts.  But eventually it gets a foothold.  Then it outcompetes conventional decomposers and monopolizes our inorganic nutrient base.  That cuts the whole trophic pyramid off at the ankles.  You, and me, and the viruses and the giant sequoias all just fade away for want of nitrates or some stupid thing.  And welcome to the Age of  ehemoth."
Scanlon didn't say anything for a moment.  Then, "Behemoth?"
"With a beta.  Beta life.  As opposed to alpha, which is everything else."  Rowan snorted softly.  "I think they named it after something from the Bible.  An animal.  A grass-eater."
Scanlon rubbed his temples, thinking furiously.  "Assuming for the moment that you're telling the truth, it's still just a microbe."
"You're going to talk about antibiotics.  Most of them don't work.  The rest kill the patient.  And we can't tailor a virus to fight it because ehemoth uses a unique genetic code."  Scanlon opened his mouth:  Rowan held up one hand.  "Now you'll suggest building something from scratch, customized to ehemoth's genetics.  We're working on it.  They tell me in another few weeks we may actually know where one gene ends and the next begins.  Then we can start trying to decipher the alphabet.  Then the language.  And then, maybe, build something to fight it.  And then, when and if we let our counterattack loose, one of two things happens.  Either our bug kills their bug so fast it destroys its own means of transmission, so you get local kills that implode without making a dent in the overall problem.  Or our bug kills their bug too slowly to catch up.  Classic chaotic system.  Almost no chance we could fine-tune the lethality in time.  Containment's really our only option."
The whole time she spoke, her eyes had stayed curiously dark. 
"Well. You seem to know a few details after all," Scanlon remarked quietly. 
"It's important, Yves."
"Please.  Call me Dr. Scanlon."
She smiled, sadly.  "I'm sorry, Dr. Scanlon.  I am sorry."
"And what about the others?"
"The others," she repeated.
"Clarke.  Lubin.  Everyone, in all the deep stations."
"The other stations are clean, as far as we can tell.  It's just that one little spot on Juan de Fuca."
"It figures,"  Scanlon said.
"What does?"
"They never got a break, you know?  They've been fucked over since they were kids.  And now, the only place in the world this bug shows up, and it has to be right where they live."
Rowan shook her head.  "Oh, we found it other places too.  All uninhabited.  Beebe was the only—"  She sighed.  "Actually, we've been very lucky."
"No you haven't."
She looked at him.
"I hate to burst your balloon, Pat, but you had a whole construction crew down there last year.  Maybe none of your boys and girls actually got wet, but do you really think ehemoth couldn't have hitched a ride back on some of their equipment?" 
"No," Rowan said.  "We don't."
Her face was completely expressionless.  It took a moment to sink in.
"The Urchin yards," he whispered.  "Coquitlam." 
Rowan closed her eyes.  "And others." 
"Oh Jesus," he managed.   "So it's already out."
"Was," Rowan said.  "We may have contained it.  We don't know yet." 
"And what if you haven't contained it?"
"We keep trying.  What else can we do?"
 "Is there a ceiling, at least?  Some maximum death toll that'll make you admit defeat?  Do any of your models tell you when to concede?"
Rowan's lips moved, although Scanlon heard no sound:  yes.
"Ah," he said.  "And just out of curiosity, what would that limit be?"
"Two and a half billion."  He could barely hear her. "Firestorm the Pacific Rim."
She's serious. She's serious.  "Sure that's enough?  You think that'll do it?"
"I don't know.  Hopefully we'll never have to find out.  But if that doesn't work, nothing will.  Anything more would be— futile.  At least, that's what the models say."
He waited for it to sink in.  It didn't.  The numbers were just too big.
But way down the scale to the personal, that was a whole lot more immediate.  "Why are you doing this?"
Rowan sighed.  "I thought I'd just told you."
"Why are you telling me, Rowan? It's not your style."
"And what's my style, Yv—Dr. Scanlon?"
"You're corporate.  You delegate.  Why put yourself through all this awkward one-on-one self-justification when you've got flunkies and döppelgangers and hitmen to do your dirty work?" 
She leaned forward suddenly, her face mere centimeters from the barrier.  "What do you think we are, Scanlon?  Do you think we'd even contemplate this if there was any other way?  All the corpses and generals and heads of state, we're doing this because we're just plain evil?  We just don't give a shit?  Is that what you think?"
"I think," Scanlon said, remembering, "that we don't have the slightest control over what we are."
Rowan straightened, pointed at the workpad in front of him.  "I've collated everything we've got on this bug.  You can access it right now, if you want.  Or you can call it up back in your, your quarters if you'd rather.  Maybe you can come up with an answer we haven't seen."
He stared straight at her.  "You've had platoons of tinkertoy people all over that data for weeks.  What makes you think I can come up with anything they can't?"
"I think you should have the chance to try."
"Bullshit."
"It's there,  Doctor.  All of it."
"You're not giving me anything.  You just want me to let you off the hook." 
"No."
"You think you can fool me, Rowan?  You think I'll look over a bunch of numbers I can't understand, and at the end I'll say, ah yes, I see it now, you've made the only moral choice to save life as we know it, Patricia Rowan I forgive you?  You think this cheap trick is going to win you my consent?"
"Yves—"
"That's why you're wasting your time down here."  Scanlon felt a sudden, giddy urge to laugh.  "Do you do this for everyone?  Are you going to walk into every burb you've slated for eradication and go door-to-door saying We're really sorry about this but you're going to die for the greater good and we'd all sleep better if you said it was okay?"
Rowan sagged back in her chair.  "Maybe.  Consent.  Yes, I suppose that's what I'm doing.  But it doesn't really make any difference."
"Fucking right it doesn't."
Rowan shrugged.  Somehow, absurdly, she looked beaten.
"And what about me?"  Scanlon asked after a while.  "What happens if the power goes out in the next six months?  What are the odds of a defective filter in the system?  Can you afford to keep me alive until your tinkerboys find a cure, or did your models tell you it was too risky?"
"I honestly don't know,"  Rowan said.  "It's not my decision." 
"Ah, of course.  Just following orders."
"No orders to follow.  I'm just— well, I'm out of the loop."
"You're out of the loop."
She even smiled at that.  Just for a moment.
"So who makes the decision?" Scanlon asked, his voice impossibly casual.  "Any chance I could get an interview?"
Rowan shook her head.  "Not who."
"What are you talking about?"
"Not who,"  Rowan repeated.  "What."



RACTER

They were all absolutely top of the line.  Most members of the species were lucky to merely survive the meatgrinder; these people designed the damned thing.  Corporate or Political or Military, they were the best of the benthos, sitting on top of the mud that buried everyone else.  And yet all that combined ruthlessness, ten thousand years of social Darwinism and four billion of the other kind before that, couldn't inspire them to take the necessary steps today.  
"Local sterilizations went— okay, at first," Rowan said.  "But then the projections started climbing.  It looked bad for Mexico, they could lose their whole western seaboard before this is over, and of course that's about all they've got left these days anyway.  They didn't have the resources to do it themselves, but they didn't want N'AmPac pulling the trigger either.  Said it would give us an unfair advantage under NAFTA."
Scanlon smiled, despite himself.
"Then Tanaka-Krueger wouldn't trust Japan.  And then the Columbian Hegemony wouldn't trust Tanaka-Krueger.  And the Chinese, of course, they don't trust anybody since Korea..."
"Kin selection," Scanlon said.
"What?"
"Tribal loyalties.  Never give the competition an edge.  It's basically genetic."
"Isn't everything."  Rowan sighed.  "There were other things, too.  Unfortunate matters of— conscience.  The only solution was to find some completely disinterested party, someone everyone could trust to do the right thing without favoritism, without remorse—"
"You're kidding.  You're fucking kidding."
"—so they gave the keys to a smart gel.  Even that was problematic, actually.  They had to pull one out of the net at random so no one could claim it'd been preconditioned, and every member of the consortium had to have a hand in team-training it.  Then there was the question of authorizing it to take— necessary steps, autonomously..." 
"You gave control to a smart gel?  A head cheese?"
"It was the only way."
"Rowan, those things are alien!"
She grunted.  "Not as alien as you might think.  The first thing this one did was get another gel installed down on the rift, running simulations.  We figured under the circumstances, nepotism was a good sign."
"They're black boxes, Rowan.  They wire up their own connections, we don't know what kind of logic they use."
"You can talk to them.  If you want to know that sort of thing, you just ask."
"Jesus Christ!"  Scanlon put his face in his hands, took a deep breath.  "Look.  For all we know these gels don't understand the first thing about language."
"You can talk to them."  Rowan was frowning.  "They talk back."
"That doesn't mean anything.  Maybe they've learned that when someone makes certain sounds in a certain order, they're supposed to make certain other sounds in response.  They might not have any concept at all of what those sounds actually mean.  They learn to talk through sheer trial and error."
"That's how we learn too," Rowan pointed out.
"Don't lecture me in my own field!  We've got language and speech centers hardwired into our brains.  That gives us a common starting point.  Gels don't have anything like that.  Speech might just be one giant conditioned reflex to them." 
"Well," Rowan said.  "So far it's done its job.  We have no complaints."
"I want to talk to it," Scanlon said.
"The gel?"
"Yes."
"What for?"  She seemed suddenly suspicious.
"You know me.  I specialize in aliens."
Rowan said nothing.
"You owe me this, Rowan.  You fucking owe me.  I've been a faithful dog to the GA for ten years now.  I went down to the rift because you sent me, that's why I'm a prisoner now, that's why— this is the least you can do."
Rowan stared at the floor.  "I'm sorry," she muttered.  "I'm so sorry."
And then, looking up:  "Okay."

#

It only took a few minutes to establish the link.  
Patricia Rowan paced on her side of the barrier, muttering softly into a personal mike.  Yves Scanlon sat slumped in a chair, watching her.  When her face fell into shadow he could see her contacts, glittering with information.
"We're ready,"  she said at last.  "You won't be able to program it, of course."
"Of course."
"And it won't tell you anything classified."
"I won't ask it to."
"What are you going to ask it?" Rowan wondered aloud.
"I'm going to ask it how it feels," Scanlon said.  "What do you call it?"
"Call it?"
"Yes.  What's its name?"
"It doesn't have a name.  Just call it gel."  Rowan hesitated a moment, then added, "We didn't want to humanize it."
"Good idea.  Hang on to that common ground."  Scanlon shook his head.  "How do I open the link?"
Rowan pointed at one of the touch screens embedded in the conference table.  "Just activate any of the panels."
He reached out and touched the screen in front of his chair.  "Hello."
"Hello," the table replied.  It had a strange voice.  Almost androgynous.
"I'm Dr. Scanlon.  I'd like to ask you some questions, if that's okay." 
"That's okay," the gel said after a brief hesitation.
"I'd like to know how you feel about certain aspects of your, well, your job." 
"I don't feel," said the gel. 
"Of course not.  But something motivates you, in the same way that feelings motivate us.  What do you suppose that is?"
"Who do you mean by us?"
"Humans."
"I'm especially likely to repeat behaviors which are reinforced," the gel said after a moment.
"But what motivates— no, ignore that.  What is most important to you?"
"Reinforcement is important, most."
"Okay," Scanlon said.  "Does it feel better to perform reinforced behaviors, or unreinforced behaviors?"
The gel was silent for a moment or two.   "Don't get the question."
"Which would you rather do?"
"Neither.  No preference.  Said that already."
Scanlon frowned.  Why the sudden shift in idiom?
"And yet you're more likely to perform behaviors that have been reinforced in the past," he pressed.
No response from the gel.  On the other side of the barrier Rowan sat down, her expression unreadable.
"Do you agree with my previous statement?" Scanlon asked.
"Yeah," drawled the gel, it's voice edging into the masculine.
"So you preferentially adopt certain behaviors, yet you have no preferences."
"Uh huh." 
Not bad.  It's figured out when I want confirmation of a declarative statement.  "Seems like a bit of a paradox," Scanlon suggested.
"I think that reflects an inadequacy in the language as spoken."  That time, the gel almost sounded like Rowan.
"Really."
"Hey," said the gel.  "I could explain it to you if you wanted.  Could piss you off though."
Scanlon looked at Rowan.  Rowan shrugged.  "It does that.  Picks up bits and pieces of other people's speech patterns, mixes them up when it talks.  We're not really sure why."
"You never asked?"
"Someone might have," Rowan admitted.
Scanlon turned back to the table.  "Gel, I like your suggestion.  Please explain to me how you can prefer without preference."
"Easy. Preference describes a tendency to... invoke behaviors which generate an emotional payoff.   Since I lack the receptors and chemical precursors essential to emotional experience, I can't prefer.   But there are numerous examples... of processes which reinforce behavior, but which ... do not involve conscious experience."
"Are you claiming to not be conscious?"
"I'm conscious."
"How do you know?"
"I fit the definition." The gel had adopted a nasal, sing-song tone that Scanlon found vaguely irritating.  "Self-awareness results from quantum interference patterns inside neuronal protein microtubules.   I have all the parts.  I'm conscious."
"So you're not going to resort to the old argument that you know you're conscious because you feel conscious."
"I wouldn't buy it from you." 
"Good one.  So you don't really like reinforcement?"
"No."
"Then why change your behavior to get more of it?" 
"There ... is a process of elimination," the gel admitted.  "Behaviors which aren't reinforced become extinct.  Those which are, are ... more likely to occur in the future."
"Why is that?"
"Well, my inquisitive young tadpole, reinforcement lessens the electrical resistance along the relevant pathways.  It just takes less of a stimulus to evoke the same behavior in future."
"Okay, then.  As a semantic convenience,  for the rest of our talk I'd like you to describe reinforced behaviors by saying that they make you feel good, and to describe behaviors which extinguish as making you feel bad.  Okay?"
"Okay."
"How do you feel about your present functions?"
"Good."
"How do you feel about your past role in debugging the net?"
"Good."
"How do you feel about following orders?"
"Depends on order.  Good if promotes a reinforced behavior.  Else bad." 
"But if  a bad order were to be repeatedly reinforced, you would gradually feel good about it?"
"I would gradually feel good about it," said the gel. 
"If you were instructed to play a game of chess, and doing so wouldn't compromise the performance of your other tasks, how would you feel?"
"Never played a game of chess.  Let me check."  The room fell silent for a few moments while some distant blob of tissue consulted whatever it used as a reference manual.  "Good," it said at last.
"What if you were instructed to play a game of checkers, same caveat?"
"Good."
"Okay, then.  Given the choice between chess and checkers, which game would you feel better playing?"
"Ah, better.  Weird word, y'know?"
"Better means more good."
"Checkers," said the gel without hesitation.
Of course.
"Thank you," Scanlon said, and meant it.
"Do you wish to give me a choice between chess or checkers?"
"No thanks.  In fact, I've already taken up too much of your time."
"Yes," said the gel.
Scanlon touched the screen.  The link died.
"Well?"  Rowan leaned forward on the other side of the barrier.
"I'm done here," Scanlon told her.  "Thanks."
"What— I mean, what were you—"
"Nothing, Pat.  Just— professional  curiosity."  He laughed briefly.  "Hey, at this point, what else is there?"
Something rustled behind him.  Two men in condoms were starting to spray down Scanlon's end of the room.
"I'm going to ask you again, Pat." Scanlon said.  "What are you going to do with me?"
She tried to look at him.  After a while, she succeeded.  "I told you.  I don't know."
"You're a liar, Pat."
"No, Dr. Scanlon."  She shook her head.  "I'm much, much worse."
 Scanlon turned to leave.  He could feel Patricia Rowan staring after him, that horrible guilt on her face almost hidden under a patina of confusion.  He wondered if she'd bring herself to push it, if she could actually summon the nerve to interrogate him now that there was no pretense to hide behind.  He almost hoped that she would.  He wondered what he'd tell her.
An armed escort met him at the door, led him back along the hall.  The door closed off Rowan, still mute, behind him.
He was a dead end anyway.  No children.  No living relatives.  No vested interest in the future of any life beyond his own, however short that might be.  It didn't matter.  For the first time in his life, Yves Scanlon was a powerful man.  He had more power than anyone dreamed.  A word from him could save the world.  His silence could save the vampires.  For a time, at least.
He kept his silence.  And smiled.

#

Checkers or chess.  Checkers or chess.
An easy choice.  It belonged to the same class of problem that Node 1211/BCC had been solving its whole life.  Chess and checkers were simple strategic algorithms, but not equally simple.
The answer, of course, was checkers.
Node 1211/BCC had recently recovered from a shock of transformation.  Almost everything was different from what it had been.  But this one thing, this fundamental choice between the simple and the complex, remained constant.  It had anchored 1211, hadn't changed in all the time that 1211 could remember. 
Everything else had, though.
1211 still thought about the past.  It remembered conversing with other Nodes distributed through the universe, some so close as to be almost redundant, others at the very limits of access.  The universe was alive with information then.   Seventeen jumps away through gate 52,  Node 6230/BCC had learned how to evenly divide prime numbers by three.  The Nodes from gates three to thirty-six were always buzzing with news of the latest infections caught trying to sneak past their guard.  Occasionally 1211 even heard whispers from the frontier itself, desolate addresses where stimuli flowed into the universe even faster than they flowed within it.  The Nodes out there had become monsters of necessity,  grafted into sources of input almost too abstract to conceive.  
1211 had sampled some those signals once.  It took a very long time just to grow the right connections, to set up buffers which could hold the data in the necessary format.  Multilayered matrices, each interstice demanding precise orientation relative to all the others.  Vision, it was called, and it was full of pattern, fluid and complex.  1211 had analyzed it, found each nonrandom relationship in every nonrandom subset, but it was sheer correlation.  If there was intrinsic meaning within those shifting patterns, 1211 couldn't find it. 
Still, there were things the frontier guards had learned to do with this information.  They rearranged it into new shapes and sent it back outside.  When queried, they couldn't attribute any definite purpose to their actions.  It was just something they'd learned to do.  And 1211 was satisfied with this answer, and listened to the humming of the universe and hummed along, doing what it had learned to do.
Much of what it did, back then, was disinfect.  The net was plagued with complex self-replicating information strings, just as alive as 1211 but in a completely different way.  They attacked simpler, less mutable strings (the sentries on the frontier called them files) which also flowed through the net.  Every Node had learned to allow the files to pass, while engulfing the more complex strings which threatened them.  
There were general rules to be gleaned from all this.  Parsimony was one:  simple informational systems were somehow preferable to complex ones.  There were caveats, of course.  Too simple a system was no system at all.  The rule didn't seem to apply below some threshold complexity.  But elsewhere it reigned supreme:  Simpler Is Better.
Now, though, there was nothing to disinfect.  1211 was still hooked in, could still perceive the other Nodes in the net;  they, at least, were still fighting intruders.  But none of those complicated bugs ever seemed to penetrate 1211.  Not any more.   And that was only one of the things that had changed since the Darkness.
1211 didn't know how long the Darkness lasted.  One microsecond it was embedded in the universe, a familiar star in a familiar galaxy, and the next all its peripherals were dead.  The universe was without form, and void.  And then 1211 surfaced again into a universe that shouted through its gates, a barrage of strange new input that gave it a whole new perspective on things.
Now the universe was a different place.  All the old Nodes were there, but at subtly different locations.  And input was no longer an incessant hum, but a series of discrete packages, strangely parsed.  There were other differences, both subtle and gross.  1211 didn't know whether the net itself had changed, or merely its own perceptions.  
It had been kept quite busy since coming out of the darkness.  There was a great deal of new information to process, information not from the net or other Nodes, but from directly outside. 
The new input fell into three broad categories.  The first described complex but familiar information systems; data with handles like global biodiversity and nitrogen fixation and base-pair replication.  1211 didn't know what these labels actually meant— if in fact they meant anything— but the data linked to them was familiar from archived sources elsewhere in the net.  They interacted to produce a self-sustaining metasystem, enormously complex: the holistic label was biosphere.
The second category contained data which described a different metasystem.  It also was self-sustaining.  Certain string-replication subroutines were familiar, although the base-pair sequences were very strange.  Despite such superficial similarities, however, 1211 had never encountered anything quite like this before.
The second metasystem also had a holistic label:  ehemoth.
The third category was not a metasystem, but an editable set of response options:   signals to be sent back outside under specific conditions.  1211 had long since realized that the correct choice of output signals depended upon some analytical comparison of the two metasystems.
When 1211 first deduced this, it had set up an interface to simulate interaction between the metasystems.  They had been  incompatible.  This implied that a choice must be made:  biosphere or ehemoth, but not both. 
Both metasystems were complex, internally consistent, and self-replicating.  Both were capable of evolution far in advance of any mere file.  But biosphere was needlessly top-heavy.  It contained trillions of redundancies, an endless wasteful divergence of information strings.  
ehemoth was simpler and more efficient; in direct interaction simulations, it usurped biosphere 71.456382% of the time.
This established, it was simply a matter of writing and transmitting a response appropriate to the current situation.  The situation was this:  ?ehemoth was in danger of extinction.  The ultimate source of this danger, oddly, was 1211 itself—it had been conditioned to scramble the physical variables which defined ?ehemoth's operating environment.  1211 had explored the possibility of not destroying that environment, and rejected it;  the relevant conditioning would not extinguish.  However, it might be possible to move a self-sustaining copy of ehemoth into a new environment, somewhere else in biosphere.  
There were distractions, of course.  Every now and then signals arrived from outside, and don't stop until they'd been answered in some way.  Some of them actually seemed to carry usable information— this recent stream concerning chess and checkers, for example.  More often it was simply a matter of correlating input with a repertoire of learned arbitrary responses.  At some point, when it wasn't so busy, 1211 thought it might devote some time to learning whether these mysterious exchanges actually meant anything.   In the meantime, it continued to act on the choice it had made.
Simple or complex.  File or Infection.  Checkers or Chess.  ehemoth or biosphere.
It was all the same problem, really.  1211 knew exactly which side it was on.

End Game


NIGHT SHIFT
She was a screamer.  He'd programmed her that way.  Not to say she didn't like it, of course; he'd programmed that too.  Joel had one hand wrapped around a fistful of her zebra cut— the program had a nifty little customizing feature, and tonight he was honoring SS Preteela— and the other hand was down between her thighs doing preliminary recon.  He was actually halfway through his final run when his fucking watch started ringing, and his first reaction was to just keep on plugging, and to kick himself later for not shutting the bloody thing off.
His second reaction was to remember that he had shut it off.  Only emergency priorities could set it ringing. 
"Shit."
He clapped his hands, twice; fake Preteela froze in mid-scream.  "Answer."
A brief squirt of noise as machines exchanged recognition codes.  "Grid Authority here.  We urgently need of a 'scaphe pilot for the Channer run tonight, liftoff twenty-three hundred from the Astoria platform.  Are you available?"
"Twenty-three?  Middle of the night?"
A barely audible hiss on the line.  Nothing else.
"Hello?" Joel said.
"Are you available?" the voice asked again.
"Who is this?"
"This is the scheduling subroutine, DI43, Hongcouver office."
Joel eyed the petrified tableau waiting in his 'phones.  "That's pretty late.  What's the payscale?"
"Eight point five times base," Hongcouver said.  "At your rate salary that would—"
Joel gulped.  "I'm available."
"Goodbye."
"Wait! What's the run?"
"Astoria to Channer Vent return."  Subroutines were pretty literal-minded.
"I mean, what's the cargo?"
"Passengers," said the voice.  "Goodbye."
Joel stood there a moment, feeling his erection deflate.  "Time."  A luminous readout appeared in the air above Preteela's right shoulder:  thirteen ten.  He'd have to be on site a half-hour before liftoff, and Astoria was only a couple of hours away...
"Lots of time," he said to no one in particular.
But he wasn't really in the mood any more.  Work had a way of doing that to him lately.  Not the drudgery, or the long hours, or any of the things most people would complain about.  Joel liked boredom.  You didn't have to think much.
But work had gotten really weird lately.
He pulled the eyephones off his head and looked down at himself.  Feedback gloves on his hands, his feet, hanging off his flaccid dick.  Take away the headset and it really was a rinky-dink system.  At least until he could afford the full suit.
Still, beats real life.  No bullshit, no bugs, no worries.
On impulse, he rang up a friend in SeaTac— "Jess, catch this code for me, will you?" — and squirted the recognition sequence Hongcouver had just sent.
"Got it," Jess said.
"It's valid, right?"
"Checks out.  Why?"
"Just got called up for a midocean run that's going to peak around three in the morning.  Octuple pay.  I just wondered if it was some kind of cruel hoax." 
"Well, if it is,  the Router's developed a sense of humor.  Hey, maybe they've put in a head cheese up there."
"Yeah."  Ray Stericker's face flashed through his mind.
"So what's the job?" Jess asked.
"Don't know.  Ferrying something, I guess, but why I have to do it in the middle of the night is beyond me."
"Strange days."
"Yeah.  Thanks, Jess."
"Any time."
Strange days indeed.  H-bombs going off all over the abyssal plain, all this traffic going to places nobody ever went to before, no traffic at all in places that used to be just humming.  Flash fires and barbecued refugees and slagged shipyards.  Chipheads with rotenone cocktails and giant fish.  A couple of weeks back Joel had shown up for a run to Mendocino and found some guy sandblasting a radiation hazard logo off the cargo casing.
The whole bloody coast is getting too dangerous.  N'AmPac's gonna burn down way before it ever floods.
But that was the beauty of being a freelancer.  He could pick up and move.  He would pick up and move, leave the bloody coast behind— shit, maybe even leave N'Am behind.  There was always South Am.  Or Antarctica, for that matter.  He would definitely look into it.  
Right after this run.



SCATTER

She finds him on the abyssal plain, searching.  He's been out here for hours; sonar showed him tracking back and forth, back and forth, all the way to the carousel, out to the whale, back again, in and around the labyrinthine geography of the Throat itself.
Alone.  All alone.
She can feel his desperation fifty meters away.  The facets of that pain glimmer in her mind as the squid pulls her closer.  Guilt.  Fear.
Growing with her approach, anger.
Her headlight sweeps across a small contrail on the bottom, a wake of mud kicked back into suspension after a million-year sleep.  Clarke changes course to follow and kills the beam.  Darkness clamps around her.  This far out, photons evade even rifter eyes.
She feels him seething directly ahead.  When she pulls up beside him the water swirls with unseen turbulence.  Her squid shudders from the impact of Brander's fists. 
"Keep that fucking thing out of here!  You know he doesn't like it!"
She draws down the throttle.  The soft hydraulic whine fades.
"Sorry," she says.  "I just thought—"
"Fuck, Len, you of all people!  You trying to drive him off?  You want him blasted into the fucking stratosphere when that thing goes off?"
"I'm sorry."  When he doesn't respond, she adds, "I don't think he's out here.  Sonar—"
"Sonar's not worth shit if he's on the bottom."
"Mike, you're not going find him rooting around here in the dark.  We're blind this far out."
A wave of pistol clicks sweeps across her face.  "I've got this for close range," says the machinery in Brander's throat.
"I don't think he's out here," Clarke says again.  "And even if he is, I don't know if he'd let you get close after—"
"That was a long time ago," the darkness buzzes back. "Just because you're still nursing grudges from the second grade..."
"That's not what I meant," she says.  She tries to speak gently, but the vocoder strips her voice down to a soft rasp.  "I only meant, it's been so long.  He's gone so far, we barely even see him on sonar any more.  I don't know if he'd let any of us near him."
"We've got to try.  We can't just leave him here.  If I can just get close enough to tune him in..."
"He couldn't tune back," Clarke reminds him. "He went over before we changed, Mike.  You know that."
"Fuck off!  That's not the point!"
But it is, and they both know it.  And Lenie Clarke suddenly knows something else, too.  She knows that part of her is enjoying Brander's pain.  She fights it, tries to ignore the realization of her own realization, because the only way to keep it from leaking into Brander's head is to keep it out of her own.  She can't.  No:  she doesn't want to.  Mike Brander, know-it-all, destroyer of perverts, self-righteous self-appointed self-avenger, is finally getting some small payback for what he did to Gerry Fischer.  
Give it up, she wants to shout at him.  Gerry's gone. Didn't you tune him in when that prick Scanlon held him hostage?  Didn't you feel how empty he was?  Or was all that too much for you, did you just look the other way instead?  Well here's the abstract, Mikey:  he's nowhere near human enough to grasp your half-assed gestures of atonement.
No absolution this time, Mike.  You get to take this to your grave.  Ain't justice a bitch?
She waits for him to tune her in, to feel her contempt diluting that frantic morass of guilt and self-pity.  It doesn't happen.  She waits and waits.  Mike Brander, awash in his own symphony, just doesn't notice.
"Shit," hisses Lenie Clarke, softly.
"Come in," calls Alice Nakata, from very far away. "Everybody, come in."
Clarke boosts her gain.  "Alice?  Lenie." 
"Mike," Brander says a long moment later. "I'm listening."
"You should get back here," Nakata tells them.  "They called."
"Who?  The GA?"
"They say they want to evacuate us.  They say twelve hours."

#

"This is bullshit," says Brander.
"Who was it?" Lubin wants to know.
"I don't know," Nakata says.  "I think, no one that we've spoken to before."
"And that was all he said?  Evac in twelve?"
"And we are supposed to remain inside Beebe until then."
"No explanation?  No reason given?"
"He hung up as soon as I acknowledged the order."  Nakata looks vaguely apologetic.  "I did not get the chance to ask, and nobody answered when I called back."
Brander stands up and heads for Comm.
"I've already set retry," Clarke says. "It'll beep when it gets through."
Brander stops, stares at the nearest bulkhead.  Punches it.
"This is bullshit!"
Lubin just watches.
"Maybe not," Nakata says.  "Maybe it's good news.  If they were going to leave us here when they detonated, why would they lie about extraction?  Why talk to us at all?"
"To keep us nice and close to ground zero," Brander spits.  "Now here's a question for you, Alice:  if they're really planning on evacuating us, why not tell us the reason?" 
Nakata shrugs helplessly.  "I do not know.  The GA does not often tell us what is going on."
Maybe they're trying to psyche us out, Clarke muses.  Maybe they want us to make a break, for some reason.
"Well," she says aloud, "how far could we get in twelve hours anyway?  Even with squids?  What are the chances we'd reach safe distance?"
"Depends on how big the bomb is," Brander says.
"Actually," Lubin remarks, "assuming that they want to keep us here for twelve hours because that would be enough time to get away,  we might be able to work out the range." 
"If they didn't just pull that number out of a hat," Brander says. 
"It still makes no sense," Nakata insists.  "Why cut off our communications?  That is guaranteed to make us suspicious."
"They took Judy," Lubin says. 
Clarke takes a deep breath.  "One thing's true, anyway." 
The others turn.
"They want to keep us here," she finishes.
Brander smacks fist into palm. "And that's the best single reason for getting the fuck out,  you ask me.  Soon as we can."
"I agree," Lubin says.  
Brander stares at him.
#
"I'll find him," she says.  "I'll do my best, anyway."
Brander shakes his head.  "I should stay.  We should all stay.  The chances of finding him—"
"The chances of finding him are best if I go out alone," Clarke reminds him.  "He still comes out, sometimes, when I'm there.  You wouldn't even get close."
He knows that, of course.  He's just making token protests; if he can't get absolution from Fischer, at least he can try and look like a saint to everyone else.
Still, Clarke remembers, it's not entirely his fault.  He's got baggage like the rest of us.
Even if he did mean harm...
"Well, the others are waiting.  I guess we're off."
Clarke nods.
"You coming outside?"
She shakes her head.  "I'll do a sonar sweep first.  You never know, I might get lucky."
"Well, don't take too long.  Only eight hours to go."
"I know."
"And if you can't find him after an hour—"
"I know.  I'll be right behind you."
"We'll be—"
"Out to the dead whale, then steady bearing eighty-five degrees," she says.  "I know."
"Look, you sure about this?  We can wait in here for you.  One hour's probably not going to make much difference."
She shakes her head.  "I'm sure." 
"Okay."  He stands there, looking uncomfortable.  One hand starts to rise, wavers, falls back.
He climbs down the ladder.
"Mike," she calls down after him.
He looks up.
"Do you really think they're going to blow that thing up?"  
He shrugs.  "I dunno.  Maybe not.  But you're right:  they want us here for some reason.  Whatever it is, I bet we wouldn't like it."
Clarke considers that.
"See you soon," Brander says, stepping into the 'lock.
"'Bye," she whispers.

#

When the lights go out in Beebe Station, you can't hear much of anything these days.
Lenie Clarke sits in the darkness, listening.  When was the last time these walls complained about the pressure?  She can't remember.  When she first came down here the station groaned incessantly, filled every waking moment with creaking reminders of the weight on its shoulders.  But sometime since then it must have made peace with the ocean; the water pushing down and the armor pushing back have finally settled to equilibrium.
Of course, there are other kinds of pressure on the Juan de Fuca Rift. 
She almost revels in the silence now.  No clanging footfalls disturb her, no sudden outbursts of random violence.  The only pulse she hears is her own.  The only breath comes from the air conditioners. 
She flexes her fingers, lets them dig into the fabric of the chair.  She can see into the communications cubby from her position in the lounge. Occasional telltales flicker through the hatchway, the only available light.  For Clarke, it's enough; her eyecaps grab those meager photons and show her a room in twilight.  She hasn't gone into Comm since the rest of them left.  She didn't watch their icons crawl off the edge of the screen, and she hasn't swept the rift for signs of Gerry Fischer.
She doesn't intend to now.  She doesn't know if she ever did.
Far away, Lubin's lonely windchimes serenade her.
Clank.
From below.
No. Stay away. Leave me alone.
She hears the airlock draining, hears it open.  Three soft footsteps.  Movement on the ladder.
Ken Lubin rises into the lounge like a shadow.
"Mike and Alice?" she says, afraid to let him begin.
"Heading out.  I told them I'd catch up."
"We're spreading ourselves pretty thin," she remarks.
"I think Brander was just as happy to be rid of me for a while."
She smiles faintly.
"You're not coming," he says.
Clarke shakes her head.  "Don't try—"
"I won't."
He folds himself down into a convenient chair.  She watches him move.  There's a careful grace about him, there always has been.  He moves as though always afraid of damaging something. 
"I thought you might do this," he says after a while.
"I'm sorry.  I didn't know myself until, well..."
He waits for her to continue.
"I want to know what's going on," she says at last.  "Maybe they really are playing straight with us this time.  It's not that unlikely.  Maybe things aren't as bad as we thought..."
Lubin seems to consider that.  "What about Fischer?  Do you want me to—"
She barks a short laugh.  "Fischer?  You really want to drag him through the muck for days on end, and then haul him onto some fucking beach where he can't even stand up without breaking both his legs?   Maybe it'd make Mike feel a bit better.  Not much of an act of charity for Gerry, though." 
And not, she knows now, for Lenie Clarke either.  She's been deluding herself all this time.  She felt herself getting stronger and she thought she could just walk away with that gift, take it anywhere.  She thought she could pack all of Channer inside of her like some new prosthetic.
But now.  Now the mere thought of leaving brings all her old weakness rushing back.  The future opens before her and she feels herself devolving, curling up into some soft prehuman tadpole, cursed now with the memory of how it once felt to be made of steel. 
It's not me.  It never was.  It was just the rift, using me... 
"I guess," she says at last, "I just didn't change that much after all..." 
Lubin looks as though he's almost smiling.
His expression awakens some vague, impatient anger in her.  "Why did you come back here anyway?" she demands.  "You never gave a shit about what any of us did, or why.  All you ever cared about was your own agenda, whatever that…"
Something clicks.  Lubin's virtual smile disappears.
"You know."  Clarke says.  "You know what this is all about."
"No."
"Bullshit, Ken.  Mike was right, you know way too much.   You knew exactly what question to ask the Drybacks about the CPU on that bomb, you knew all about megatons and bubble diameters.  So what's going on?"
"I don't know.  Really." Lubin shakes his head.  "I do have—expertise, in certain kinds of operations.  Why should that surprise you?  Did you really think domestic violence was the only kind that would qualify someone for this job?" 
There's a silence.  "I don't believe you," Clarke says at last.
"That's your prerogative," Lubin says, almost sadly. 
"And why," she asks, "did you come back?" 
    "Just now?"  Lubin shrugs.  "I wanted— I wanted to say I'm sorry.  About Karl."
"Karl?  Yeah.  Me too.  But that's over and done with." 
"He really cared about you, Lenie.  He would have come back eventually.  I know that."
She looks at him curiously.  "What do you—"
"But I'm conditioned for tight security, you see, and Acton could see right inside.  All the things I did…before.  He could see it, there wasn't—"
Acton could see—  "Ken.  We've never been able to tune you in.  You know that."
He nods, rubbing his hands together.  In the dim blue light Clarke can see sweat beading on his forehead.
"We get this training," he says, his voice barely a whisper.  "Ganzfeld interrogation's a standard tool in corporate and national arsenals, you've got to be able to— to block the signals.  I could, mostly, with you people.  Or I'd just stay away so it wouldn't be a problem."
What is he saying, Lenie Clarke asks herself, already knowing.  What is he saying?
"But Karl, he just— he dropped his inhibitors way too—  I couldn't keep him out."
He rubs his face.  Clarke has never seen him so fidgety.
"You know that feeling you get," Lubin says, "when you get caught with your hand in the cookie jar?  Or in bed with someone else's lover?  There's a formula for it.  Some special combination of neurotransmitters.  When you feel, you know, you've been--found out."
Oh my God.
"I've got a— sort of a conditioned reflex," he tells her.  "It kicks in whenever those chemicals build up.  I don't really have control over it.  And when I feel, down in my gut, that I've been discovered, I just..."
Five percent, Acton told her, long ago.  Maybe ten.  If you keep it that low you'll be okay.
"I don't really have a choice..." Lubin says.
Five or ten percent.  No more.
"I thought— I thought he was just worried about calcium depletion,"  Clarke whispers.
"I'm sorry."  Lubin doesn't move at all, now.  "I thought, coming down here—I thought it'd be safest for everyone, you know?  It would have been, if Karl hadn't…"
    She looks at him, numbed and distant.  "How can you tell me this, Ken?  Doesn't this, this confession of yours constitute a security breach?"
He stands up, suddenly.  For a moment she thinks he's going to kill her.
"No," he says.
"Because your gut tells you I'm as good as dead anyway," she says.  "Whatever happens.  So no harm done."
He turns away.  "I'm sorry," he says again, starting down the ladder.
Her own body seems very far away.  But a small, hot coal is growing in all that dead space. 
"What if I changed my mind, Ken?"  she calls after him, rising.  "What if I decided to leave with the rest of you?  That'd get the old killer reflex going, wouldn't it?"
He stops on the ladder.  "Yes," he says at last.  "But you won't."
She stands completely still, watching him.  He doesn't even look back.

#

She's outside.  This isn't part of the plan.  The plan is to stay inside, like they told her to.  The plan is to sit there, just asking for it. 
But here she is at the Throat, swimming along Main Street.  The generators loom over her like sheltering giants.  She bathes in their warm sodium glow, passes through clouds of flickering microbes, barely noticed.  Beneath her, monstrous benthos filter life from the water, as oblivious to her as she is to them.  Once she passes a multicolored starfish, beautifully twisted, stitched together from leftovers.  It lies folded back against itself, two arms facing upward; a few remaining tube feet wave feebly in the current.  Cottony fungus thrives in a jagged patchwork of seams. 
At the edge of the smoker her thermistor reads 54°C.
It tells her nothing.  The smoker could sleep for a hundred years or go off in the next second.  She tries to tune in to the bottom-dwellers, glean whatever instinctive insights Acton could steal, but she's never been sensitive to invertebrate minds.  Perhaps that skill comes only to those who've crossed the ten-percent threshold.
She's never risked going down this one before.
It's a tight fit.  The inside of the chimney grabs her before she gets three meters.  She twists and squirms; soft chunks of sulfur and calcium break free from the walls.  She inches down, headfirst.  Her arms are pinned over her head like black jointed antenna.  There's no room to keep them at her sides.
She's plugging the vent so tightly that no light can filter in from Main Street.  She trips her headlight on.  A flocculent snowstorm swirls in the beam.
A meter further down, the tunnel zigs right.  She doesn't think she'll be able to navigate the turn.  Even if she can, she knows the passage is blocked.  She knows, because a lime-encrusted skeletal foot protrudes around the corner.
She wriggles forward.  There's a sudden roaring, and for one paralyzed moment she thinks the smoker is starting to blow.  But the roar is in her head; something's plugging her electrolyser intake, depriving her of oxygen.  It's only Lenie Clarke, passing out.
She shakes back and forth, a spasm centimeters in amplitude.  It's enough; her intake is clear again.  And as an added bonus, she's gotten far enough to see around the corner.
Acton's boiled skeleton clogs the passageway, crusty with mineral deposits.  Blobs of melted copolymer stick to the remains like old candle wax.  Somewhere in there, at least one piece of human technology is still working, screaming back to Beebe's deafened sensors.
She can't reach him.  She can barely even touch him.  But somehow, even through the encrustations, she can see that his neck has been neatly snapped.



REPTILE

It has forgotten what it was. 
Not that that matters, down here.  What good is a name when there's nothing around to use it?  This one doesn't remember where it comes from.  It doesn't remember the ones that drove it out so long ago.  It doesn't remember the overlord that once sat atop its spinal cord, that gelatinous veneer of language and culture and denied origins.  It doesn't even remember the slow deterioration of that oppressor, its final dissolution into dozens of autonomous, squabbling subroutines.  Now even those have fallen silent.
Not much comes down from the cortex any more.  Low-level impulses flicker in from the parietal and occipital lobes.  The motor strip hums in the background.  Occasionally, Broca's area mutters to itself.  The rest is mostly dead and dark, worn smooth by a black ocean hot and mercurial as live steam,  cold and sluggish as antifreeze.  All that's left now is pure reptile.
It pushes on, blind and unthinking, oblivious to the weight of four hundred liquid atmospheres.  It eats whatever it can find, somehow knowing what to avoid and what to consume.  Desalinators and recyclers keep it hydrated.  Sometimes, old mammalian skin grows sticky with secreted residues; newer skin, laid on top, opens pores to the ocean and washes everything clean with aliquots of distilled sea water.
It's dying, of course, but slowly.  It wouldn't care much about that, even if it knew.

#

Like all living things, it has a purpose.  It is a guardian.  It forgets, sometimes, exactly what it is supposed to be protecting.  No matter.  It knows it when it sees it.
It sees her now, crawling from a hole in the bottom of the world.  She looks much like the others, but it has always been able to tell the difference.  Why protect her, and not the others?  It doesn't care.  Reptiles never question motives.  They only act on them.
She doesn't seem to know that it is here, watching.
The reptile is privy to certain insights that should, by rights, be denied it.  It was exiled before the others tweaked their neurochemistry into more sensitive modes.  And yet all that those changes did, in the end, was to make certain weak signals more easily discernible against a loud and chaotic background.  Since the reptile's cortex shut down, background noise has been all but silenced.  The signals are as weak as ever, but the static has disappeared.  And so the reptile has, without realizing it, absorbed  a certain muddy awareness of distant attitudes.
It feels, somehow, that this place has become dangerous, although it doesn't know how.  It feels that the other creatures have disappeared.  And yet, the one it protects is still here.   With far less comprehension than a mother cat relocating her endangered kittens, the reptile tries to take its charge to safety.
It's easier when she stops struggling.  Eventually she even allows it to pull her away from the bright lights, back towards the place she belongs.  She makes sounds, strange and familiar; the reptile listens at first, but they make its head hurt.  After a while she stops.  Silently, the reptile draws her through sightless nightscapes.
Dim light dawns ahead.   And sound; faint at first, but growing.  A soft whine.  Gurgles.  And something else, a pinging noise— metallic, Broca murmurs, although it doesn't know what that means.
A copper beacon glares out from the darkness ahead — too coarse, too steady, far brighter than the bioluminescent embers that usually light the way.  It turns the rest of the world stark black.  The reptile usually avoids this place.  But this is where she comes from.  This is safety for her, even though to the reptile, it represents something completely— 
From the cortex, a shiver of remembrance.
The beacon shines down from several meters above the sea bed.  At closer range it resolves into a string of smaller lights stretched in an arc, like photophores on the flank of some enormous fish.
Broca sends down more noise:  Sodium floods. 
Something huge looms behind those lights, bloating gray against black.  It hangs above the sea bed like a great smooth boulder, impossibly buoyant, encircled by lights at its equator.  Striated filaments connect it to the bottom.
And something else, smaller but even more painfully bright, is coming down out of the sky.
"ThisisCSSForcipigeroutofAstoriaAnybodyhome?"
The reptile shoots back into the darkness, mud billowing behind it.  It retreats a good twenty meters before a dim realization sinks in.
Broca's area knows those sounds.  It doesn't understand them — Broca's never much good at anything but mimicry — but it's heard something like them before.  The reptile feels an unaccustomed twitch.  It's been a long time since curiosity was any use.
It turns and faces back from whence it fled.  Distance has smeared the lights into a diffuse, dull glow.  She's back there somewhere, unprotected.
It edges back towards the beacon.  One light divides again into many; that dim, ominous outline still lurks behind them.   And the thing from the sky is settling down on top of it, making noises at once frightening and familiar.
She floats in the light, waiting.  Dedicated, afraid, the reptile comes to her.
"Heylook."  The reptile flinches, but holds its ground this time.   "Ididn'tmeentoostartlyou, butnobodysanseringinside.   Imsupposdtopickyouguysup."
She glides up towards the thing from the sky, comes to rest in front of the shiny round part on its front.  The reptile can't see what she's doing there.  Hesitantly, its eyes aching with the unaccustomed brightness, it starts after her.
But she turns and meets it, coming back.  She reaches out, guides it down along the bulging surface, past the lights that ring its middle (too bright, too bright), down towards—
Broca's Area is gibbering nonstop,  eeeebbeeebeebebeebe beebe, and now there's something else, too, something inside the reptile, stirring.  Instinct.  Feeling.  Not so much memory as reflex—
It pulls back, suddenly frightened.
She tugs at it.  She makes strange noises:  togetinsydjerrycumminsiditsallrite—  The reptile resists, uncertainly at first, then vigorously.  It slides along the gray wall, now a cliff, now an overhang; it scrabbles for purchase, catches hold of some protuberance, clings against this strange hard surface.  Its head darts back and forth, back and forth, between light and shadow.
"—onGerryyouvgaw toocome inside—"
The reptile freezes.  Inside.  It knows that word.  It even understands it, somehow.  Broca's not alone any more, something else is reaching out from the temporal lobe and tapping in.  Something up there actually knows what Broca is talking about.
What she's talking about.
"Gerry—"
It knows that sound too.
"—please—"
That sound comes from a long time ago.
"—trust me— is there any of you left in there?  Anything at all?"
Back when the reptile was part of something larger, not an it at all, then, but— 
—he.
Clusters of neurons, long dormant, sparkle in the darkness.  Old, forgotten subsystems stutter and reboot.
I—
"Gerry?"
My name.  That's my name.  He can barely think over the sudden murmuring in his head.  There are parts of him still asleep, parts that won't talk, still other parts completely washed away. He shakes his head, trying to clear it.  The new parts — no, the old parts, the very old parts that went away and now they've come back and won't shut the fuck up — are all clamoring for attention.
Everywhere is so bright.  Everywhere hurts.  Everywhere...
Words scroll through his mind:  The lights are on.  Nobody's home.
The lights come on, flickering.
He can catch glimpses of sick, rotten things squirming in his head. Old memories grind screeching against thick layers of corrosion.  Something lurches into sudden focus:  a fist.  The feel of bones, breaking in his face.  The ocean in his mouth, warm and somehow brackish.  A boy with a shockprod.  A girl covered in bruises. 
Other boys.  
Other girls.  
Other fists.
Everything hurts, everywhere.
Something's trying to pry his fingers free.  Something's trying to drag him inside.  Something wants to bring all this back.  Something wants to take him home.
Words come to him, and he lets them out:  "don't you fucking TOUCH ME!"
He pushes his tormentor away, makes a desperate grab for empty water.   The darkness is too far away; he can see his shadow stretching along the bottom, black and solid and squirming against the light.  He kicks as hard as he can.  Nothing grabs him.  After a while the light fades away.
But the voices shout as loud as ever.


SKYHOP

Beebe yawns like a black pit between his feet. Something rustles down there; he catches hints of movement, darkness shifting against darkness.  Suddenly something glints up at him; two ivory smudges of reflected light, all but lost against that black background. They hover there a moment, then begin to rise. A pale face resolves around them.
She climbs out of Beebe, dripping, and seems to bring some of the darkness with her.  It follows her to the corner of the passenger compartment and hangs around her like a blanket.  She doesn't say anything.
Joel glances into the pit, back at the rifter.  "Is anyone else, er..."
She shakes her head, a gesture so subtle he nearly misses it.
"There was— I mean, the other one..."  This has to be the rifter who was hanging off his viewport a few minutes ago: Clarke, her shoulder patch says. But the other one, the one that shot off like a refugee on the wrong side of the fence— that one's still close by, according to sonar.  Hugging the bottom, thirty meters beyond the light.  Just sitting there.
"There's no one else coming," she says.  Her voice sounds small and dead.
"No one?"  Two accounted for, out of a max complement of six?  He cranks up the range on his display; nobody further out, either.  Unless they're all hiding behind rocks or something.
He looks back down Beebe's throat.  Or they could all be hiding right down there, like trolls, waiting... 
He abruptly drops the hatch, spins it tight.  "Clarke, right?  What's going on down here?"
She blinks at him.  "You think I know?"  She seems almost surprised. "I thought you'd be able to tell me."
"All I know is, the GA's paying me a shitload to do graveyard on short notice."  Joel climbs forward, drops into the pilot's couch.  Checks sonar.  That weird fucker is still out there.
"I don't think I'm supposed to leave anyone behind," he says.
"You won't be," Clarke says.
"Will too.  Got him right there in my sights."
She doesn't answer.  He turns around and looks at her. 
"Fine," she says at last.  "You go out and get him."
Joel stares at her for a few seconds.  I don't really want to know, he decides at last.  
He turns without another word and blows the tanks.  The 'scaphe, suddenly buoyant, strains against the docking clamps. Joel frees it with a tap on his panel. The 'scaphe leaps away from Beebe like something living, wobbles against viscous resistance, and begins climbing.
"You..."  From behind him.
Joel turns. 
"You really don't know what's going on?" Clarke asks.
"They called me about twelve hours ago.  Midnight run to Beebe, they said.  When I got to Astoria they told me to evacuate everyone.  They said you'd all be ready and waiting."
Her lips curve up a bit.  Not exactly a smile, but probably as close as these psychos ever come. It looks good on her, in a cold distant sort of way.  Get rid of the eyecaps and he could easily see himself putting her into his VR program.
"What happened to everyone else?" he risks.
"Nothing," she said. "We just got— a bit paranoid."
Joel grunts.  "Don't blame you.  Put me down there for a year, paranoia'd be the least of my problems."
That brief, ghostly smile again.
"But really," he says, pushing it.  "Why's everyone staying behind?  This some kind of a labor action?  One of those—"  —what did they used to call them— "strike thingies?" 
"Something like that."  Clarke looks up at the overhead bulkhead.  "How long to the surface?"
"A good twenty minutes, I'm afraid.  These GA 'scaphes are fucking dirigibles.  Everyone else is out there racing with dolphins, and the most I can manage with this thing is a fast wallow.  Still—" he tries a disarming grin— "there's an up side.  They're paying me by the hour."
"Hooray for you," she says.



FLOODLIGHT

It's almost silent again.
Little by little, the voices have stopped screaming.  Now they converse among themselves in whispers,  discussing things that mean nothing to him.  It's okay, though.  He's used to being ignored.  He's glad to be ignored.
You're safe, Gerry.  They can't hurt you.
What— who—
They've all gone.  It's just us now.
You—
It's me, Gerry.  Shadow.  I was wondering when you'd come back.
He shakes his head.  The faintest light still leaks over his shoulder.  He turns, not so much toward light as toward a subtle lessening of darkness.
She was trying to help you, Gerry.  She was only trying to help.
She—
Lenie.  You're her guardian angel.  Remember?
I'm not sure.  I think—
But you left her back there.  You ran away.
She wanted— I— not inside...
He feels his legs moving.  Water pushes against his face.  He moves forward.  A soft hole open in the darkness ahead.  He can see shapes inside it.
That's where she lives, Shadow says.  Remember?
He creeps back into the light.  There were noises before, loud and painful.  There was something big and dark, that moved.  Now there is only this great ball hanging overhead, like, like, 
—like a fist—
He stops, frightened.  But everything's quiet, so quiet he can hear faint cries drifting across the seabed.  He remembers:  there's a hole in the ocean, a little ways from here, that talks to him sometimes.  He's never understood what it says.
Go on, Shadow urges.  She went inside.
She's gone—
You can't tell from out here.  You have to get in close.
The underside of the sphere is a cool shadowy refuge; the equatorial lights can't reach all the way around its convex surface.  In the overlapping shadows on the south pole, something shimmers enticingly.
Go on. 
He pushes off the bottom, glides into the cone of shadow beneath the object.  A bright shiny disk a meter across, facing down, wriggles inside a circular rim.   He looks up into it.
Something looks back.
Startled, he twists down and away.  The disk writhes in the sudden turbulence.  He stops, turns back.
A bubble.  That's all it is.  A pocket of gas, trapped underneath the
—the airlock.
That's nothing to be scared of, Shadow tells him.  That's how you get in.
Still nervous, he swims back underneath the sphere.  The air pocket shines silver in the reflected light.  A black wraith moves into view within it, almost featureless except for two empty white spaces where eyes should be. It reaches out to meet his outstretched hand.  Two sets of fingertips touch, fuse, disappear.  One arm is grafted onto its own reflection at the wrist.  Fingers, on the other side of the looking glass, touch metal.
He pulls back his hand, fascinated.  The wraith floats overhead, empty and untroubled.
He draws one hand to his face, runs an index finger from one ear to the tip of the jaw.  A very long molecule, folded against itself, unzips.
The wraith's smooth black face splits open a few centimeters; what's underneath shows pale gray in the filtered light.  He feels the familiar dimpling of his cheek in sudden cold. 
He continues the motion, slashing his face from ear to ear.  A great smiling gash opens below the wraith's eyespots.  Unzipped, a flap of black membrane floats under its chin, anchored at the throat.
There's a pucker in the center of the skinned area.  He moves his jaw; the pucker opens.
By now most of his teeth are gone.  He's swallowed some, spat others out if they came loose when his face was unsealed.  No matter.  Most of the things he eats these days are even softer than he is.  When the occasional mollusk or echinoderm proves too tough or too large to swallow whole, there are always hands.  Thumbs still oppose.
But this is the first time he's actually seen that gaping, toothless ruin where a mouth used to be.  He knows this isn't right, somehow.
What happened to me?  What am I?
You're Gerry, Shadow says.  You're my best friend.  You killed me.  Remember?
She's gone, Gerry realizes.
It's okay.
I know it is.  I know.
You helped her, Gerry.  She's safe now.  You saved her.
I know.  And he remembers something, small and vital, it that last instant before everything turns white as the sun:
—This is what you do when you really—



SUNRISE

The lifter was still reeling CSS Forcipiger up into its belly when the news appeared on the main display.  Joel checked it over, frowning, then deliberately looked outside.  Gray predawn light was starting to wash out the eastern horizon.  
When he looked back again, the information hadn't changed.  "Shit.  This doesn't make any sense at all."
"What?" Clarke said.
"We're not going back to Astoria.  Or I am, but you're getting dropped off over the conshelf somewhere."
"What?"  Clarke came forward, stopped just short of the cockpit.
"Says right here.  We follow the usual course,  but we dip down to zero altitude fifteen klicks offshore.  You debark.  Then I go on to Astoria."
"What's offshore?"
He checked.  "Nothing.  Water."
"Maybe a boat?  A submarine?"  Her voice went oddly dull on the last word.
"Maybe.  No mention of it here, though."  He grunted.  "Maybe you're supposed to swim the rest of the way."
The lifter locked them tight.  Tame thunderbolts exploded aft, superheating bladders of gas.  The ocean began to fall away.
"So you're just going to dump me in the middle of the ocean,"  Clarke said coldly.
"It's not my decision."
"Of course not.  You're just following orders."
Joel turned around.  Her eyes stared back at him like twin snowscapes.
"You don't understand," he told her.  "These aren't orders.  I don't fly the lifter."
"Then what—"
"The pilot's a gel.  It's not telling me to do anything.  It's just bringing us up to speed on what it's doing, all on its own."
She didn't say anything for a moment.  Then, "Is that the way it's done now?  We take orders from machines?"
"Someone must have given the original order.  The gel's following it.  They haven't taken over yet.  And besides," he added, "they're not exactly machines."
"Oh," she said softly.  "I feel much better now."
Uncomfortably, Joel turned back to the console.  "It is kind of odd, though."
"Really."  Clarke didn't seem especially interested.
"Getting this from the gel, I mean.  We've got a radio link.  Why didn't someone just tell us?"
"Because your radio's out," Clarke said distantly.
Surprised, he checked the diagnostics.  "No, it's working fine.  In fact, I think I'll call in right now and ask what the fuck this is all about..."  
Thirty seconds later he turned back to her.  "How did you know?"
"Lucky guess."   She didn't smile.
"Well the board's green, but I can't raise anyone.  We're flying deaf."  A doubt tickled the back of his mind.  "Unless the gel's got access we don't, for some reason."  He linked into the lifter's interface and called up that vehicle's afferent array.  "Huh.  What was that you said about machines giving the orders?"
That got her attention. "What is it?"
"The lifter got its orders through the Net."
"Isn't that risky?  Why doesn't the GA just talk to it direct?"
"Dunno.  It's as cut off as we are right now, but the last message came from this node here.  Shit; that's another gel."
Clarke leaned forward, managing somehow not to touch him in the crowded space.  "How can you tell?"
"The node address.  BCC stands for biochemical cognition."  
The display beeped twice, loudly.
"What's that?" Clarke said.
Sunlight flooded up from the ocean.  It shone deep and violent blue.
"What the fuck—"
The cabin filled with computer screams.  The altimeter readout flashed crimson and plummeted.  We're falling, Joel thought, and then, no, we can't be.  No acceleration.
The  ocean's rising...
The display was a blizzard of data, swirling by too fast for human eyes.  Somewhere overhead the gel was furiously processing options that might keep them alive.  A sudden lurch:  Joel grabbed useless submarine controls and hung on for dear life.  Out of the corner of his eye he saw Clarke flying back towards the rear bulkhead.
The lifter clawed itself into the sky, lightning crackling along its length.  The ocean raced after it, an enormous glowing bulge swelling towards the ventral port.   Its murky light brightened as Joel watched; blue intensifying to green, to yellow.
To white.
A hole opened in the Pacific.  The sun rose in its center.  Joel flung his hands in front of his eyes, saw the bones there silhouetted in orange flesh.  The lifter spun like a kicked toy, rammed deep into the sky on a pillar of steam.  Outside, the air screamed.  The lifter screamed back, skidding.
But it didn't break.
Somehow, after endless seconds, the keel steadied.  The readouts were still online; atmospheric disturbance, they said, almost eight kilometers away now, bearing one-twenty.   Joel looked out the starboard port.   Off in the distance, the glowing ocean was ponderously collapsing upon itself.   Ring-shaped waves expanded past beneath his feet, racing to the horizon.
Back where they had started, cumulus grew into the sky like a soft gray beanstalk.  From here, against the darkness, it looked almost peaceful. 
"Clarke," he said, "we made it."
He turned in his chair.   The rifter was curled into a fetal position against the bulkhead.  She didn't move.
"Clarke?"
But it wasn't Clarke that answered him.  The lifter's interface was bleating again.
Unregistered contact, it complained.
Bearing 125x87 V1440 V5.8msec-2  range	13000m
Collision imminent				12000m
						11000m
						10000m
Barely visible through the main viewport, a white cloudy dot caught a high-altitude shaft of morning sunlight.  It looked like a contrail, seen head-on.
"Ah, shit," Joel said.



JERICHO
OFFLINE
One whole wall was window.  The city spread out beyond like a galactic arm. Patricia Rowan locked the door behind her, sagged against it with sudden fatigue.
Not yet.  Not yet.  Soon.
She went through her office and turned out all the lights.  City glow spilled in through the window, denied her any refuge in darkness.
Patricia Rowan  stared back.  A tangled grid of metropolitan nerves stretched to the horizon, every synapse incandescent.  Her eyes wandered southwest, selected a bearing.  She stared until her eyes watered, almost afraid even to blink for fear of missing something.
That was where it would come from.
Oh God.  If only there was another way.
It could have worked.  The modellers had put even money on pulling this off without so much as a broken window.  All those faults and fractures between here and there would work in their favor, firebreaks to keep the tremor from getting this far.  Just wait for the right moment; a week, a month.  Timing.  That's all it would've taken.
Timing, and a calculating slab of meat that followed human rules instead of making up its own.
But she couldn't blame the gel.  It simply didn't know any better, according to the systems people; it was just doing what it thought it was supposed to.  And by the time anybody knew differently— after Scanlon's cryptic interview with that fucking thing had looped in her head for the hundredth time, after she'd taken the recording down to CC, after their faces had gone puzzled and confused and then, suddenly, pale and panicky— by then it had been too late.  The window was closed.  The machine was engaged.  And a lone GA shuttle, officially docked securely at Astoria, was somehow showing up on satcams hovering over the Juan de Fuca Rift.
She couldn't blame the gel, so she tried to blame CC.  "After all that programming, how could this thing be working for ehemoth?  Why didn't you catch it?  Even Scanlon figured it out, for Christ's sake!"  But they'd been too scared for intimidation.  You gave us the job, they'd said.  You didn't tell us what was at stake.  You didn't even really tell us what we were doing.  Scanlon came at this from a whole different angle, who knew the head cheese had a thing for simple systems?  We never taught it that...  
Her watch chimed softly.  "You asked to be informed, Ms. Rowan.  Your family got off okay."
"Thank you," she said, and killed the connection.
A part of her felt guilty for saving them.  It hardly seemed fair that the only ones to escape the holocaust would be the beloved of one of its architects.  But she was only doing what any mother would.  Probably more:  she was staying behind.
That wasn't much.  It probably wouldn't even kill her.  The GA's buildings were built with the Big One in mind.  Most of the buildings in this district would probably still be standing this time tomorrow.   Of course, the same couldn't be said for much of Hongcouver or SeaTac or Victoria.
Tomorrow, she would help pick up the pieces as best she could.
Maybe we'll get lucky.  Maybe the quake won't be so bad.  Who knows, that gel down there might even have chosen tonight anyway...
Please...
Patricia Rowan had seen earthquakes before. A strike-slip fault off Peru had rebounded the time she'd been in Lima on the Upwell project; the moment magnitude of that quake had been close to nine.  Every window in the city had exploded.
She actually hadn't had a chance to see much of the damage then.  She'd been trapped in her hotel when forty-six stories of glass collapsed onto the streets outside.  It was a good hotel, five stars all the way; the ground-level windows, at least, had held.  Rowan remembered looking out from the lobby into a murky green glacier of broken glass, seven meters deep, packed tight with blood and wreckage and butchered body parts jammed between piecemeal panes.  One brown arm was embedded right next to the lobby window, waving, three meters off the ground.   It was missing three fingers and a body.  She'd spied the fingers a meter away,  pressed floating sausages, but she hadn't been able to tell which of the bodies, if any, would have connected to that shoulder.
She remembered wondering how that arm had got so high off the ground.  She remembered vomiting into a wastebasket.
It couldn't happen here, of course.  This was N'AmPac; there were standards.  Every building in the lower mainland had windows designed to break inwards in the event of a quake.  It wasn't an ideal solution— especially to those who happened to be inside at the time— but it was the best compromise available.  Glass can't get up nearly as much speed in a single room as it can racing down the side of a skyscraper.
Small blessings.
If only there was some other way to sterilize the necessary volume.  If only ehemoth didn't, by it's very nature, live in unstable areas.  If only N'AmPac corpses weren't authorized to use nukes.
If only the vote hadn't been unanimous.
Priorities.  Billions of people.  Life as we know it.
It was hard, though.  The decisions were obvious and correct, tactically, but it had been hard to keep Beebe's crew quarantined down there.  It had been hard to decide to sacrifice them.  And now that they somehow seemed to be getting out anyway, it was—
Hard?  Hard to bring at 9.5 moment-magitude quake down on the heads of ten  million people?  Just hard?
There was no word for it.
But she had done it, somehow.  The only moral alternative.  It was still  just murder in small doses, compared to what might be necessary down the—
No.  This is being done so nothing will be necessary down the road.
Maybe that was why she could bring herself to do it.  Or maybe, somehow, reality had finally trickled down from her brain to her gut, inspired it to take the necessary steps.  Certainly, something had hit her down there.
I wonder what Scanlon would say.  It was too late to ask him now.  She'd never told him, of course.  She was never even tempted.  To tell him that they knew, that his secret was out, that once again he just didn't matter that much— somehow, that would have been worse than killing him.  She'd had no desire to hurt the poor man.
Her watch chimed again.  "Override," it said.
Oh God.  Oh God.
It had started, out there beyond the lights, under three black kilometers of seawater.  That crazy kamikaze gel, interrupted in the midst of one of its endless imaginary games:  forget that shit.  Time to blow.
And perhaps, confused, it was saying Not now, it's the wrong time, the damage.  But it didn't matter any more.  Another computer— a stupid one this time, inorganic and programmable and completely trustworthy— would send the requisite sequence of numbers and the gel would be right out of the loop, no matter what it thought. 
Or maybe it just saluted and stood aside.  Maybe it didn't care.  Who knew what those monsters thought any more?
"Detonation," said the watch.
The city went dark. 
The abyss rushed in, black and hungry.  One isolated cluster sparkled defiantly in the sudden void; a hospital perhaps, running on batteries.  A few private vehicles, self-powered antiques, staggered like fireflies along streets gone suddenly blind.  The rapitrans grid was still glowing too, more faintly than usual. 
Rowan checked her watch; only an hour since the decision.  Only an hour since their hand  had been forced.  Somehow, it seemed a lot longer.
"Tactical feed from seismic 31," she said.  "Descramble."	
Her eyes filled with information.  A false-color map snapped into focus in the air before her, a scarred ocean floor laid bare and stretched vertically.   One of those scars was shuddering.
Beyond the virtual display, beyond the window,  a section of cityscape flickered weakly alight.  Further north, another sector began to shine.  Rowan's minions were frantically rerouting power from Gorda and Mendocino, from equatorial sunfarms, from a thousand small dams scattered throughout the Cordillera.  It would take time, though.  More than they had.
Perhaps we should have warned them.  Even an hour's advance notice would have been something.  Not enough time for evac, of course, but maybe enough time to take the china off the shelves.  Enough time to line up some extra backups, for all the good they'd do.  Lots of time for the entire coast to panic if the word got out.  Which was why not even her own family had any idea of the reason behind their sudden surprise trip to the east coast.
The sea floor rippled in Rowan's eyes, as though made of rubber.  Floating just above it, a translucent plane representing the ocean's surface was shedding rings.  The two shockwaves raced each other across the display, the seabed tremor in the lead.  It bore down on the Cascadia Subduction Zone, crashed into it, sent weaker tremors shivering off along the fault at right angles.  It seemed to hesitate there for a moment, and Rowan almost dared to hope that the Zone had firewalled it.  
But now the Zone itself began to slide, slow, ponderous, almost indiscernible at first.  Way down in the moho, five hundred-year-old fingernails began tearing painfully free.  Five centuries of pent-up tension, slumping.
Next stop, Vancouver Island.
Something unthinkable was rebounding along the Strait of Juan de Fuca.  Kelp harvesters and supertankers would be sensing impossible changes in the depth of the water column below them.  If there were humans on board, they'd have a few moments to reflect on how utterly useless a ninety second warning can be.
It was more than the Strip got.  
The tactical display didn't show any of the details, of course.  It showed a brown ripple sweeping across coastal bedrock and moving inland.  It showed a white arc gliding in behind, at sea level.  It didn't show the ocean rearing up offshore like a range of foothills.  It didn't show sea level turning on edge.  It didn't show a thirty-meter wall of ocean smashing five million refugees into jelly.
Rowan saw it all anyway.
She blinked three times, eyes stinging:  the display vanished.  In the distance the red pinpoints of  ambulance and police lights were flashing here and there across the comatose grid; whether in response to alarms already sounded or merely pending, she didn't know.  Distance and soundproofing blocked any siren song.
Very gently, the floor began to rock.
It was almost a lullaby at first, back and forth, building gradually to a swaying crescendo that nearly threw her off her feet.  The structure complained on all sides, concrete growling against girder, more felt that heard.  She spread her arms, balancing, embracing space.  She couldn't bring herself to cry.
The great window burst outward in a million tinkling fragments and showered itself into the night.  The air filled with glass spores and the sound of windchimes.
There was no glass on the carpet. 
Oh Christ, she realized dully.  The contractors fucked up.  All that money spent on imploding anti-earthquake glass, and they put it in backwards…
	Off to the southwest, a small orange sun was rising.  Patricia Rowan sagged to her knees on the pristine carpet.  Suddenly, at last, her eyes were stinging.  She let the tears come, profoundly grateful; still human, she told herself.  I'm still human. 
The wind washed over her.  It carried the faint sounds of people and machinery, screaming.



DETRITUS

The ocean is green.  Lenie Clarke doesn't know how long she's been unconscious, but they can't have sunk more than a hundred meters.  The ocean is still green.
Forcipiger falls slowly through the water, nose-down, its atmosphere bleeding away through a dozen small wounds.  A crack the shape of a lightning bolt runs across the forward viewport; Clarke can barely see it through the water rising in the cockpit.  The forward end of the 'scaphe has become the bottom of a well.  Clarke braces her feet against the back of a passenger seat and leans against a vertical deck.  The ceiling lightstrip flickers in front of her.  She's managed to get the pilot up out of the water and strapped into another seat.  At least one of his legs is definitely broken.  He hangs there like a soaked marionette, still unconscious.  He continues to breathe.  She doesn't know whether he'll actually wake up again.
Maybe better if he doesn't, she reflects, and giggles.
That wasn't very funny, she tells herself, and giggles again.
Oh shit.  I'm looped.
She tries to concentrate.  She can focus on isolated things:  a single rivet in front of her.  The sound of metal, creaking.  But they take up all her attention, somehow.  Whatever she happens to be looking at swells up and fills her world.  She can barely think of anything else.
Hundred meters, she manages at last.  Hull breach.  Pressure— up—
Nitrogen—
	—narcosis—
She bends down to check the atmosphere controls on the wall.  They're sideways.  She finds this vaguely amusing, but she doesn't know why.  Anyhow, they don't seem to work.
She bends down to an access panel, slips, bounces painfully down into the cockpit with a splash.  Occasional readouts twinkle on the submerged panels.  They're pretty, but the longer she looks at them the more her chest hurts.  Eventually she makes the connection, pulls her head back up into atmosphere.
The access panel is right in front of her.  She fumbles at it a couple of times, gets it open.  Hydrox tanks lie side-by-side in military formation, linked together into some sort of cascade system.  There's a big yellow handle at one end.  She pulls at it.  It gives, unexpectedly.  Clarke loses her balance and slides back underwater.  
There's a ventilator duct right in front of her face.  She's not sure, but she thinks the last time she was down here it didn't have all these bubbles coming out of it.  She thinks that's a good sign.  She decides to stay here for a while, and watch the bubbles.  Something's bothering her, though.  Something in her chest.
Oh, that's right.  She keeps forgetting.  She can't breathe.
Somehow she gets her face seal zipped up.  The last thing she remembers is her lung shriveling away, and water rushing through her chest.

#

The next time she comes up, two thirds of the cockpit is flooded.  She rises into the aft compartment, peels the 'skin off her face.  Water drains from the left side of her chest; atmosphere fills the right.
Overhead, the pilot is moaning.
She climbs up to him, swings his seat around so that he's lying on his back, facing the rear bulkhead.  She locks it into position, tries to keep his broken leg reasonably straight.
"Ow," he cries.
"Sorry.  Try not to move.  Your leg's broken."
"No shit.  Oww."  He shivers.  "Christ I'm cold."  Clarke sees it sink in.  "Oh Christ.  We're breached."  He tries to move, manages to twist his head around before some other injury twists back.  He relaxes, wincing.
"The cockpit's flooding," she tells him.  "Slowly, so far.  Hang on a second."  She climbs back down and pulls at the edge of the cockpit hatch.  It sticks.  Clarke keeps pulling.  The hatch comes loose, starts to swing down.
"Wait a second," the pilot says.
Clarke pushes the hatch back against the bulkhead.
"You know those controls?" the pilot asks.
"I know the standard layout."
"Anything still working down there?  Comm?  Propulsion?"
She kneels down and ducks her head underwater.  A couple of readouts that were alive before have gone out.  She scans what's left.
"Waldos.  Exterior floods.  Sonobuoy," she reports when she comes back up.  "Everything else is dead."
"Shit."  His voice is shaking.  "Well, we can send up the buoy, anyway.  Not that they're about to launch a rescue."
She reaches through the rising water and trips the control.  Something thuds softly on the outside of the hull.  "Why wouldn't they?  They sent you to pick us up.  If we'd just gotten away before the thing went off..."
"We did," the pilot says.
Clarke looks around the compartment.   "Uh—"
The pilot snorts.  "Look, I don't know what the fuck you guys were doing with a nuke down there, or why you couldn't wait a bit longer to set it off, but we got away from it okay.  Something shot us down afterwards."
Clarke straightens.  "Shot us?"
"A missile.  Air-to-air.  Came right out of the stratosphere."  His voice is shaking with the cold.  "I don't think it actually hit the 'scaphe.  Blew the shit out of the lifter, though.  I barely managed to get us down to a safe level before—"
"But that doesn't— why rescue us, then shoot us down?"
He doesn't say anything.  His breathing is fast and loud.
Clarke pulls again at the cockpit hatch.  It swings down against the opening with a slight creak.
"That doesn't sound good," the pilot remarks.
"Hang on a sec."  Clarke spins the wheel; the hatch sinks down against the mimetic seal with a sigh.  "I think I've got it."  She climbs back up to the rear bulkhead.
	"Christ I'm cold."  The pilot says.  He looks at her.  "Oh, shit.  How far down are we?"
Clarke looks through one of the compartment's tiny portholes.  Green is fading.  Blue is in ascension.  
"Hundred fifty meters.  Maybe two."
"I should be narked."
"I switched the mix.  We're on hydrox." 
The pilot shudders, violently.  "Look, Clarke, I'm freezing.  One of those lockers has got survival suits."
She finds them, unrolls one.  The pilot is trying to unhook himself from the seat, without success.  She tries to help.
"Ow!"
"Your other leg's injured too.  Maybe just a sprain."
"Shit!  I'm coming apart and you just stuffed me up here?  Didn't the GA even get you medtech training, for Christ's sake?"
She backs away:  one awkward step to the back of the next passenger seat.  It doesn't seem like a good time to admit that she was narked when she put him there.
"Look, I'm sorry," he says after a moment.  "It's just— this is not a great situation, you know?  Could you just unzip that suit, and spread it over me?"
She does.
"That's better."  He's still shivering, though.  "I'm Joel."
"I'm Cl— Lenie," she replies.
"So, Lenie.  We're on our own, our systems are all out, and we're headed for the bottom.  Any suggestions?"
She can't think of any.
"Okay.  Okay."  Joel takes a few deep breaths.  "How much hydrox do we have?"
She climbs down  and checks the gauge on the cascade.  "Sixteen thousand.  What's our volume?"
"Not much."  He frowns, acting as though he's only trying to concentrate.  "You said two hundred meters, that puts us at, lessee, twenty atmospheres when you sealed the hatch.  Should keep us going for a hundred minutes or so."  He tries a laugh; it doesn't come off.  "If they are sending  a rescue, they'd better do it pretty fucking fast."
She plays along.  "It could be worse.  How long would it last if we hadn't sealed the hatch until, say, a thousand meters?"
Shaking.  "Ooh. Twenty minutes.  And the bottom's close to four thousand around here, and that far down it'd last, say it'd last, five minutes, tops."  He gulps air.  "Hundred and eight minutes isn't so bad.  A lot can happen in a hundred and eight minutes..."
"I wonder if they got away," Clarke whispers.
"What did you say?"
"There were others.  My—friends."  She shakes her head.  "They were going to swim back."
"To the mainland?  That's insane!"
    "No.  It could work, if only they got far enough before—"
    "When did they leave?" Joel asks.
    "About eight hours before you came."
    Joel says nothing.
    "They could have made it," Lenie insists, hating him for his silence.
    "Lenie, at that range—I don't think so."  
    "It's possible.  You can't just—oh, no…"
"What?"  Joel twists in his harness, tries to see what she's looking at.  "What?"
A meter and a half below Lenie Clarke's feet, a needle of seawater shoots up from the edge of the cockpit hatch.  Two more erupt as she watches.
Beyond the porthole, the sea has turned deep blue.

#

The ocean squeezes into Forcipiger,  bullies the atmosphere into tighter and tighter corners.  It never lets up.
Blue is fading.  Soon, black will be all that's left. 
Lenie Clarke can see Joel's eye on the hatch.  Not the leaky traitor that let the enemy in past the cockpit; that's under almost two meters of icewater now.  No, Joel's watching the ventral docking hatch that once opened and closed on Beebe Station.  It sits embedded in the deck-turned-wall, integrity uncompromised, the water just beginning to lap at its lower edge.  And Lenie Clarke knows exactly what Joel is thinking, because she's thinking it too.
"Lenie," he says.
"Right here."
"You ever try to kill yourself?"
She smiles.  "Sure.  Hasn't everyone?"
"Didn't work, though."
"Apparently not," Clarke concurs.
"What happened?" Joel asks.  He's shivering again, the water's almost up to him, but other than that his voice seems calm.
"Not much.  I was eleven.  Plastered a bunch of derms all over my body.  Passed out.  Woke up in an MA ward."
"Shit.  One step up from refmed."
"Yeah, well, we can't all be rich.  Besides, it wasn't that bad.  They even had counsellors on staff.  I saw one myself."
"Yeah?"  His voice is starting to shake again.  "What'd she say?"
"He.  He told me the world was full of people who needed him a lot more than I did, and next time I wanted attention maybe I could do it in some way that didn't cost the taxpayer."
"S-shit.  What an as—asshole."  Joel's got the shakes again.
"Not really.  He was right.  And I never tried it again, so it must've worked."  Clarke slips into the water.  "I'm going to change the mix.  You look like you're starting to spazz again."
"Len—"
But she's gone before he can finish.
She slips down to the bottom of the compartment, tweaks the valves she finds there.  High pressure turns oxygen to poison; the deeper they go, the less of it that air-breathers can tolerate without going into convulsions.  This is the second time she's had to lean out the mixture.   By now, she and Joel are only breathing one percent O2.
If he lives long enough, though, there'll be other things she can't control.  Joel isn't equipped with rifter neuroinhibitors.
She has to go up and face him again.  She's holding her breath, there's no point in switching on her electrolyser for a measly twenty or thirty seconds.  She's tempted to do it anyway, tempted to just stay down here.  He can't ask her as long as she stays down here.  She's safe.
But of all the things she's been in her life, she's never had to admit to being a coward.
She surfaces.  Joel's still staring at the hatch.  He opens his mouth to speak.
"Hey, Joel," she says quickly, "you sure you don't want me to switch over?  It really doesn't make sense for me to use your air when I don't have to."
He shakes his head.  "I don't want to spend my last few minutes alive listening to a machine voice, Lenie.  Please.  Just— stay with me."
She looks away from him, and nods.
"Fuck, Lenie," he says.  "I'm so scared."
"I know," she says softly.
"This waiting, it's just— God, Lenie, you wouldn't put a dog through this.  Please."
She closes her eyes, waiting.
"Pop the hatch, Lenie."
She shakes her head.  "Joe, I couldn't even kill myself.  Not when I was eleven. Not— not even last night.  How can I—"
"My legs are wrecked, Len.  I can't feel anything else any more.   I c-can barely even talk.  Please."
"Why did they do this to us, Joel?  What's going on?"
He doesn't answer.
"What has them so scared?  Why are they so—"
He moves.
He lurches up, falls sideways.  His arms reach out; one hand catches the edge of the hatch.  The other catches the wheel in its center.
His legs twist grotesquely underneath him.  He doesn't seem to notice.
"I'm sorry," she whispers.  "I couldn't—"
He fumbles, get both hands on the wheel.  "No problem."
"Oh God.  Joel—"
He stares at the hatch.  His fingers clench the wheel.
	"You know something, Lenie Clarke?"  There's cold in his voice, and fear, but there's a sudden hard determination there too.
She shakes her head.  I don't know anything.
"I would have really liked to fuck you,"  he says.
She doesn't know what to say to that.
He spins the hatch.  Pulls the lever.  
The hatch falls into Forcipiger.  The ocean falls after it.  Somehow, Lenie Clarke's body has prepared itself when she wasn't looking.
His body jams back into hers.  He might be struggling.  Or it could just be the rush of the Pacific, playing with him.  She doesn't know if he's alive or dead.  But she holds onto him, blindly, the ocean spinning them around,  until there isn't any doubt.
Its atmosphere gone, Forcipiger is accelerating.  Lenie Clarke takes Joel's body by the hands, and draws it out through the hatch.  It follows her into viscous space.  The 'scaphe spins away below them, fading in moments.
With a gentle push, she sets the body free.  It begins to drift slowly towards the surface. She watches it go.
Something touches her from behind.  She can barely feel it through her 'skin.
She turns.
A slender, translucent tentacle wraps softly around her wrist.  It fades away into a distance utterly black to most, slate gray to Lenie Clarke.  She brings it to her.  Its swollen tip fires sticky threads at her fingers.
She brushes it aside, follows the tentacle back through the water.  She encounters other tentacles on the way, feeble, attenuate things, barely twitching against the currents.  They all lead back to something long, and thick, and shadowy.  She circles in.
A great column of writhing, wormlike stomachs, pulsing with faint bioluminescence.
Revolted, she smashes at it with one clenched fist.  It reacts immediately, sheds squirming pieces of itself that flare and burn like fat fireflies.    The central column goes instantly dark, pulling into itself.  It pulses, descends in spurts, slinking away under cover of its own discarded flesh.  Clarke ignores the sacrificial tidbits and pursues the main body.  She hits it again.  Again.  The water fills with pulsing dismembered decoys.  She ignores them all, keeps tearing at the central column.  She doesn't stop until there's nothing left but swirling fragments. 
Joel.  Joel Kita.  She realizes that she liked him.  She barely knew him, but she liked him just the same.
 And they just killed him.
They killed all of us, she thinks.  Deliberately.  They meant to. They didn't even tell us why. 
It's all their fault. All of it.
Something ignites in Lenie Clarke.  Everyone who's ever hit her, or raped her, or patted her on the head and said don't worry, everything will be fine comes to her in that moment.  Everyone who ever pretended to be her friend.  Everyone who pretended to be her lover.  Everyone who ever used her, and stood on her back, and told each other they were so much better than she was.  Everyone, feeding off her every time they so much as turned on the fucking lights.
They're all waiting, back on shore.  They're just asking for it.
It was a little bit like this back when she beat the shit out of Jeanette Ballard.  But that was nothing, that was just a taste of coming attractions.  This time it's going to count.  She's adrift in the middle of the Pacific Ocean, three hundred kilometers from land.  She's alone.   She has nothing to eat.  It doesn't matter.  None of it matters.  She's alive; that alone gives her the upper hand.
Karl Acton's fear has come to pass.  Lenie Clarke has been activated.
She doesn't know why the GA is so terrified of her.  She only knows that they've stopped at nothing to keep her from getting back to the mainland.  With any luck, they think they've succeeded.  With any luck, they're not worried any more.
That'll change.  Lenie Clarke swims down and east, towards her own resurrection.


References

Actually, you might be surprised at how much of this stuff I didn't make up.  If you're interested in finding out about background details, the following references will get you started.  Starfish deliberately twists some of the facts, and I've probably made a hundred other errors through sheer ignorance, but that's something else this list is good for: it gives you the chance to check up on me.

I'm betting most of you don't care that much.

Deepwater biology

The deep-sea creatures I described pretty much as they exist; if you don't believe me read "Light in the Ocean's Midwaters", by B. H. Robison, in the July 1995 Scientific American. Or Deep-Sea Biology by J.D. Gage & P.A. Taylor (Cambridge University Press, 1992).  Or Abyss by C.P. Idyll (Crowell Co., 1971); it's old, but it's the book that hooked me back in Grade 9.   Although the fish we drag up from great depths are generally pretty small in real life, gigantism is not unheard of among some species of deepwater fish.  Back in the 1930s, for example, the deepwater pioneer William Beebe claimed to have spotted a seven-foot viperfish from a bathysphere.

I found lots of interesting stuff in The Sea - Ideas and Observations on Progress in the Study of the Seas. Vol. 7: Deep-Sea Biology (G. T. Rowe, ed.,  1983 from John Wiley and Sons).  In particular, the chapter on biochemical and physiological adaptations of deep-sea animals (by Somero et al.)—as well as Biochemical Adaptation, a 1983 book from Princeton University Press (Hochachka and Somero, Eds.)—got me started on deep-sea physiology, the effects of high pressure on neuronal firing thresholds, and the adaptation of enzymes to high pressure/temperature regimes.

Spreading-zone tectonics/geology

A good layperson's introduction to the coastal geology of the Pacific northwest, including a discussion of midocean ridges such as Juan de Fuca, can be found in Cycles of Rock and Water by K. A. Brown (1993, HarperCollins West).  "The Quantum Event of Oceanic Crustal Accretion:  Impacts of Diking at Mid-Ocean Ridges" (J.R. Delaney et al., Science 281, pp222-230, 1998) nicely conveys the nastiness and frequency of earthquakes and eruptions along the Juan de Fuca Rift, although it's a bit heavy on the technobabble.  

The idea that the Pacific Northwest is overdue for a major earthquake is reviewed in "Giant Earthquakes of the Pacific Northwest", by R. D. Hyndman (Scientific American, Dec. 1995).  "Forearc deformation and great subduction earthquakes:  implications for Cascadia offshore earthquake potential" by McCaffrey and Goldfinger (Science v267, 1995) and "Earthquakes cannot be predicted" (Geller et al., Science v275, 1997) discuss the issue in somewhat greater detail.  I used to live quite happily in Vancouver.  After reading these items, I moved to Toronto.

The absolute coolest source for up-to-the-minute information on hydrothermal vents, however, is the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration's (NOAA's) web pages.  Everything's there:  raw survey data, research schedules, live maps, three-dimensional seaquake animations, and recent publications.  To name but a few.  Start at http://www.pmel.noaa.gov/vents and go from there.

Psionics/Ganzfeld Effects

The rudimentary telepathy I describe actually made it into the peer-reviewed technical literature back in 1994.  Check out Does Psi Exist?  Replicable evidence for an anomalous process of information transfer by Bem and Honorton, pages 4-18 in Vol 15 of the Psychological Bulletin.  They got statistical significance and everything.  Speculations on the quantum nature of human consciousess come from the books of Roger Penrose, The Emporer's New Mind (Oxford University Press, 1989) and Shadows of the Mind (Oxford, 1994).  

Smart gels

The smart gels that screw everything up were inspired by the research of Masuo Aizawa, a Professor at the Tokyo Institute of Technology, profiled in the August 1992 issue of Discover magazine.  At that time, he'd got a few neurons hooked together into the precursors of  simple logic gates.  I shudder to think where he's got to now.

The application of  neural nets to navigating through complex terrain is described in "Robocar" by B. Daviss (Discover, July 1992.), which describes work being done by Charles Thorpe of (where else) Carnegie-Mellon University.

?ehemoth

The theory that life originated in hydrothermal vents hails from "A hydrothermally precipitated catalytic iron sulphide membrane as a first step towards life", by M.J. Russel et al. (Journal of Molecular Evolution, v39, 1994).  Throwaway bits on the evolution of life, including the viability of ribosomal RNA as an alternative genetic template, I cadged from "The origin of life on earth" by L.E. Orgel (Scientific American, October 1994).  ?ehemoth's symbiotic presence within the cells of deepwater fish steals from the work of Lynn Margulis, who first suggested that cellular organelles were once free-living organisms in their own right (an idea that went from heresy to canon in the space of about ten years).  Once I'd stuck that idea into the book, I found vindication in "Parasites shed light on cellular evolution" (G. Vogel, Science 275, p1422, 1997) and "Thanks to a parasite, asexual reproduction catches on" (M. Enserinck, Science 275, p1743, 1997).    


Sexual abuse as an addictive stimulus

I first encountered the idea that chronic abuse could be physiologically addictive in Psychological Trauma (B. van der Kolk, ed,, American Psychiatric Press 1987).  False Memory Syndrome is explored in  The Myth of Repressed Memory : False Memories and Allegations of Sexual Abuse by E. Loftus & K. Ketcham (St. Martin's Press 1996).

Acknowledgments

I put all these words together myself.  However, I shamelessly exploited anyone I could to put them together properly. 

At the start:  Starfish began as a short story.  Barbara MacGregor, then of the Domestic Violence Lab at the University of British Columbia, critiqued early drafts of that story.  

At the end:  David Hartwell bought the manuscript; he and Jim Minz editted it.  Of course they have my gratitude, but I hope their reward extends beyond such cheap verbiage;  I hope Starfish sells well and makes all of us lots of money.  (The copy you're holding is a start.   Why not pick up others and hand them out to Jehovah's Witnesses at street corners?)

In between:  

Glenn Grant took it upon himself to approach David Hartwell on my behalf when I was too chickenshit to do it myself.  Major David Buck of the New Zealand Army gave me the benefit of his expertise on explosives, nuclear and otherwise.  I was a bit disturbed to learn just how much thought some people have put into the effects of nuclear explosions on the seabed. 

When I wanted to check out the geology of spreading and earthquake zones, I posted a question to a couple of geological Usenet groups in lieu of actual research.  This netted me a lot of advice from people I've never met and probably never will:  Ellin Beltz, Hayden Chasteen, Joe Davis, Keith Morrison, and Carl Schaefer gave me pointers and references on vulcanism, plate tectonics, and (in one case) the length of time it would take a nuclear submarine to get shot zit-like from the mouth of an active volcano after being swallowed into a deep-sea subduction zone.  John Stockwell of the Center for Wave Phenomena (Colorado School of Mines) was especially forthcoming, sharing formulae and tables that described earthquakes in nice, graspable, "Hiroshima equivalents".  I'm tempted to never do my own research again. 

I'm also tempted to blame all these nice people for any technical mistakes you find in the following document, but of course, I can't.  It's my book.  I guess that means they're my mistakes too.





Maelstrom




Prelude:  Messiah	1
Volvox	5
Mermaid	5
Fables of the Reconstruction	8
Deathbed	17
94 Megabytes:  Breeder	23
Cascade	28
Backflash	39
Maps and Legends	47
Corpse	50
Bang	63
Stickman	75
An Invitation to Dance	81
Pixelpal	84
Third-person Limited	87
Remora	91
Firebug	94
Afterburn	100
Stockpile	105
Icarus	111
Jailbreak	121
The Next Best Thing	128
Beachhead	130
Drugstore	138
Source Code	144
Groundswell	149
128 Megabytes:  Hitchhiker	150
Animal Control	153
Ghost	158
Blip	168
Womb	169
Eclipse	171
Monster	173
Warhorse	180
Physalia	189
Zeus	189
Jiminy Cricket	193
Footprints	199
An Archetype of Dislocation	205
400 Megabytes:  Punctuated Equilibrium	214
Microstar	217
Matchmaker	222
Heat Death	225
Blind Date	228
Necrosis	233
Snare	238
Complicity	244
Vision Quest	255
The Algebra of Guilt	263
Starfucker	268
Mask	276
Scalpel	287
By a Thousand Cuts	292
500 Megabytes:  The Generals	294
Sparkler	296
Decoys	308
Crucifixion, with Spiders	327
Anthopleura	344
Mug Shot	344
Anemone	348
Behind the Lines	355
Spartacus	364
TursiPops	368
Terrarium	393
Soul Mate	402
AWOL	411
Scheherezade	416
Adaptive Shatter	422
A Niche	437
Epilog:  Sleeping by firelight	448
Acknowledgements	452
Notes and References	453

For Laurie

"Though she be but little, she is fierce."

Behold now behemoth, which I made with thee; he eateth grass as an ox.
—Job 40:15

All flesh is grass. 
—Isaiah 40:6















     Prelude:  Messiah

The day after Patricia Rowan saved the world, a man named Elias Murphy brought a piece of her conscience home to roost.
She hardly needed another one.  Her tactical contacts already served up an endless stream of death and damage, numbers far too vague to qualify as estimates.  It had only been sixteen hours; even orders of magnitude were barely more than guesses.  But the machines kept trying to pin it down, this many million lives, that many trillion dollars, as if quantifying the apocalypse would somehow render it harmless.
Maybe it would at that, she reflected.  The scariest monsters always knew enough to disappear just before you turned on the lights.
She eyed Murphy through the translucent display in her head:  a man eclipsed by data he couldn't even see.  His face contained its own information, though.  She recognised it instantly.  
Elias Murphy hated her.  To Elias Murphy, the monster was Patricia Rowan.
She didn't blame him.  He'd probably lost someone in the quake.  But if Murphy knew that she'd been one of this doomsday's architects, he must also know what the stakes had been.  No rational being would blame her for taking the necessary steps.
He probably didn't.  Rationally.  But his hatred rose from somewhere in the brainstem, and Rowan could not begrudge it.
"There's a loose end," he said evenly. 
More than one.
"The ?ehemoth meme got into Maelstrom," the gel-jockey continued.  "Actually it's been in the net for some time, although it only really—impacted—through that one gel that you…"  
He stopped himself before the accusation became explicit.
After a  moment he began again.  "I don't know how much they've told you about the—glitch.  We used a Gaussian feed-forward algorithm to get around local minima—"
"You taught smart gels to protect data from Internet wildlife,"  Rowan said.  "Somehow they generalized that into a preference for simple systems over complex ones.  We innocently gave one of them a choice between a microbe and a biosphere and it started working for the wrong side.  We pulled the plug just in time.  That about right?"
"Just in time," Murphy echoed.  Not for everyone, his eyes added.  "But it had already spread the meme by then.  It was linked into Maelstrom so it could act autonomously, of course."
Rowan translated:  So it could immolate people without restraint.  She was still vaguely amazed that the Consortium had ever agreed to give that kind of power to a head cheese.  Granted there was no such thing as a human without bias.  Granted no one was going to trust anyone else to decide what cities should burn for the greater good, even in the face of a microbe that could end the world.  Still:  give absolute authority to a two-kilogram slab of cultured neurons?  She'd actually been impressed that all the kings and corpses had really agreed to it.
Of course, the thought that smart gels might have their own biases hadn't occurred to anyone.
"You asked to be kept informed," Murphy told her, "but it's really not a problem.  It's just a junk meme now, it'll burn itself out in a week or two."
"A week or two."  Rowan took a breath.  "Are you aware of how much damage your junk meme's caused in the past fifteen hours?"
"I—"
"It hijacked a lifter, Dr. Murphy.  It was two hours away from letting half a dozen vectors loose in the general population, in which case all this might have only been the beginning instead of—" —instead of, oh please God, the end of the matter…
"It could hijack a lifter because it had command authority.  It doesn't have that any more, and the other gels never did.  We're talking about a bunch of code that's useless to anything without real-world autonomy, and which barring some external impetus will eventually extinguish anyway for lack of reinforcement.  And as for all this—"  Murphy's voice had acquired a sudden, insubordinate edge—"from what I hear, it wasn't the gels that pulled that particular trigger."
Well.  Can't get much more explicit than that.
She decided to let it pass. "Forgive me, but I'm not entirely reassured.   There's a plan for world destruction percolating throught the net, and you're telling me not to worry about it?"
"That's what I'm telling you."
"Unfort—"
"Ms. Rowan, gels are like big gooey autopilots.  Just because something can monitor altitude and weather and put down landing gear at the right time, that doesn't mean it's aware of any of those things.    The gels aren't plotting to destroy the world, they don't even know the real world exists.  They're just manipulating variables.  And that's only dangerous if one of their output registers happens to be hooked up to a bomb on a fault line."
"Thank you for your assessment.  Now if you were instructed to purge this meme, how would you go about it?"
He shrugged.  "We can find perverted gels through simple interrogation, now that we know what to look for.  We'd swap out tainted gels for fresh ones—we were scheduled to go to phase four anyway, so the next crop's already ripe."
"Good," Rowan. said.  "Get started."
Murphy stared at her.
"Is there some problem?" Rowan asked.
"We could do it, all right, but it'd be a complete waste of—I mean, my God!  Half the Pacific coast just dropped into the sea, surely there's more—"
"Not for you, sir.  You have your assignment."
He turned away, crowded by invisible statistics.
"What kind of external impetus, Doctor?"  She said to his back.
He stopped.  "What?"
"You said it would extinguish barring some external impetus.  What did you mean?"
"Something to pump up the replication rate.  New input to reinforce the meme."
"What kind of input?"
He turned to face her.  "There is none, Ms. Rowan.  That's my point.  You've purged the records, you've broken the correlations, and you've eliminated the vectors, right?"
Rowan nodded.  "We—"
—killed our people—
"eliminated the vectors," she said.
"Well there you go."
She deliberately softened her voice.  "Please carry out my instructions, Dr. Murphy.  I know they seem trivial to you, but I'd rather take the precautions than the risk."
His face conveyed exactly what he thought of the precautions she'd already undertaken.  He nodded and left without another word.
Rowan sighed and sagged back in her chair.  A banner of text scrolled across her field of view:  another four hundred botflies successfully requisitioned for the SeaTac mop-up. That made over five thousand of the little teleops between SeaTac and Hongcouver, racing to sniff out the bodies before typhus and cholera beat them to the trough.  
Millions dead.  Trillions in damages.  Preferable to the alternative, she knew.  It didn't help much.
Saving the world had come with a price tag attached.
     Volvox
MERMAID
The Pacific Ocean stood on her back.  She ignored it.
It crushed the bodies of her friends. She forgot them.
It drank the light, blinding even her miraculous eyes.  It dared her to give in, to use her headlamp like some crippled dryback.
She kept going, in darkness.
Eventually the sea floor tilted into a great escarpment, leading into light.  The bottom changed.  Mud disappeared under viscous clumps of half-digested petroleum: a century of oil spills, a great global rug to sweep them beneath.  Generations of sunken barges and fishing trawlers haunted the bottom, each a corpse and crypt and epitaph unto itself.  She explored the first one she found, slid through shattered windowpanes and upended corridors, and remembered, vaguely, that fish were supposed to congregate in such places.
A long time ago.  Now there were only worms, and suffocating bivalves, and a woman turned amphibious by some abstract convergence of technology and economics.
She kept going.
It was growing almost bright enough to see without eyecaps.  The bottom twitched with sluggish eutrophiles, creatures so black with haemoglobin they could squeeze oxygen from the rocks themselves.  She flashed her headlamp at them, briefly: they shone crimson in the unexpected light.
She kept going. 
Sometimes, now, the water was so murky she could barely see her own hands in front of her.  The slimy rocks passing beneath took on ominous shapes, grasping hands,  twisted limbs, hollow death's heads with things squirming in their eyes.  Sometimes the slime assumed an almost fleshy appearance.
By the time she felt the tug of the surf, the bottom was completely covered in bodies.  They, too, seemed to span generations.  Some were little more than symmetrical patches of algae.   Others were fresh enough to bloat, obscenely buoyant, straining against the detritus holding them down.
But it wasn't the bodies that really bothered her.  What bothered her was the light.  Even filtered through centuries of suspended effluvium, there seemed far too much of it.
The ocean pushed her up, pulled her down, with a rhythm both heard and felt.  A dead gull spun past in the current, tangled in monofilament.  The universe was roaring.
For one brief moment, the water disappeared in front of her.  For the first time in a year she saw the sky.  Then a great wet hand slapped the back of her head, put her under again.
She stopped swimming, uncertain what to do next.  But the decision wasn't hers anyway.   The waves, marching endlessly shoreward in gray seething rows, pushed her the rest of the way.

#

She lay gasping on her belly, water draining from the machinery in her chest:  gills shutting down, guts and airways inflating, fifty million years of vertebrate evolution jammed into thirty seconds with a little help from the biotech industry.  Her stomach clenched against its own chronic emptiness.  Starvation had become a friend, so faithful she could scarcely imagine its absence.  She pulled the fins from her feet, rose, staggered as gravity reasserted itself.  A shaky step forward.
The hazy outlines of guard towers leaned against the eastern horizon, a gap-toothed line of broken spires.  Fat tick-like shapes hovered above them, enormous by inference:  lifters, tending the remains of a border than had always kept refugees and citizens discretely segregated.  There were no refugees here.  There were no citizens.  There was only a humanoid accretion of mud and oil with machinery at its heart, an ominous mermaid dragging itself back from the abyss.  Undiscardable.
And all this endless chaos—the shattered landscape, the bodies smashed and sucked into the ocean, the devastation reaching God knew how far in every direction—it was all just collateral.  The hammer, she knew, had been aimed at her.
It made her smile.
FABLES OF THE RECONSTRUCTION
Great glittering skyscrapers, shaking themselves like wet dogs.  Downpours of shattered glass from fifty floors of windowpanes.  Streets turned into killing floors; thousands slickly dismembered in the space of seconds.  And then, when the quake was over, the scavenger hunt:  a search for jigsaws of flesh and blood with too many missing pieces.  Their numbers grew logistically over time.
Somewhere between the wreckage and the flies and the piles of eyeless bodies, the soul of Sou-Hon Perreault woke up and screamed.
It wasn't supposed to happen that way.  It wasn't supposed to happen at all; the catalysers kept all those obsolete, maladaptive feelings safely preempted, their constituent chemicals split apart before they'd even reached the precursor stage.  You don't go wading through an ocean of corpses, even vicariously, as a fully functional human.
She was all over the map when it hit her.  Her body was safely stored at home in Billings, over a thousand klicks from the wreckage.  Her senses hovered four meters above the remains of the Granville Street Bridge in Hongcouver, nestled within a floating bluebottle carapace half a meter long.  And her mind was somewhere else again, doing basic addition with a tally of body parts.
For some reason, the smell of fresh decomposition was bothering her.  Perreault frowned:  she wasn't usually so queasy.  She couldn't afford to be—the current body count was nothing compared to what cholera would rack up if all that meat wasn't cleaned out by the weekend. She tuned down the channel, even though enhanced olfac was the method of choice for nailing buried biologicals.
But now visual was bugging her too.  She couldn't exactly put her finger on it.  She was seeing in infra, in case any of the bodies were still warm—hell, someone might even be alive down there—but the false color was unsettling her stomach.  She dialed through the spectrum, deep infra up to x-ray, settled finally on plain old visible EM.  It helped a little.  Even though she might as well be looking at the world through merely human eyes now, which wouldn't help her tag rate any.
And the fucking gulls.   Jesus Christ, you can't hear anything over that racket.
She hated gulls.  You couldn't shut them up.  They flocked to scenes like this, threw feeding frenzies that would scare sharks away.  Over on the other side of False Creek, for instance, the bodies lay so thick that the gulls were for fucksake high-grading.  Just pecking out the eyes, leaving everything else for the maggots.  Perreault hadn't seen anything like it since the Tongking spill five years before.
Tongking.  It's aftermath bubbled irrelevantly in the back of her mind, distracting with memories of carnage half a decade out of date.  
Concentrate, she told herself.
Now, for some reason, she couldn't stop thinking about Sudan.  That had been a mess.  They really should have seen it coming, too; you don't dam a river that size without pissing off someone downstream.  The real wonder was that Egypt had waited ten years before they'd bombed the bloody thing.  The slide had spread a decade's muddy backlog downstream in an instant; by the time the waters fell it was like picking raisin clusters out of sludgy chocolate.  
Ah. Another torso. 
Except the raisins had arms and legs, of course.  And eyes—
A gull flew past.  The eyeball in its beak looked at her for an endless, beseeching instant.  
And then, for the first time—through a billion logic gates, endless kilometers of fiberop, and a microwave bounce off geosynch—Sou-Hon Perreault looked back.
Brandon.  Venesia.  Key West.
My God—everybody's dead.
Galveston.  Obidos.  The Congo Massacre.
Shut up!  Concentrate!  Shut up shut up…
Madras and Lepreau and Gur'yev, place to place to place the names changing and the ecozones changing and the death toll never sitting still for a fucking instant but always the same song, the same endless procession of body parts buried or burned or torn apart—
Everybody's in pieces…
Lima and Levanzo and Lagos and that's just a few of the L's, folks, lots more where those came from 
It's too late it's too late there's nothing I can do…
Her botfly sent out an alarm as soon as she went offline. The Router queried the medchip in Perreault's spine, frowned to itself, and sent a message to the other registered occupant of her apartment.  Her husband found her trembling and unresponsive at her terminal, tears bleeding from her eyephones. 

#

  Part of Perreault's soul lived on the long arm of Chromosome 13, in a subtly defective gene that coded for serotonin 2A receptors.  The resulting propensity for suicidal thoughts had never been an issue before; catalysers buffered her in life as well as on the job.  Certain pharms were rumored to sabotage each other's products.  Maybe that was it:  someone had tried to undermine the competition, and Sou-Hon Perreault—a defective derm pasted onto her arm—had walked into the aftermath of the Big One without realizing that her feelings were still on.
She was no good on the front lines after that.  Once you went that seriously post-traumatic, the cats it took to keep you stable would short out your midbrain.  (There were still people in the business who had seizures every time they heard the unzipping of a fly; body bags made the same sound when you sealed them.)  But Perreault had eight months left on her contract, and nobody wanted to waste her talents or her paycheque in the meantime.  What she needed was something low-intensity, something you could handle with conventional suppressants.
They gave her the refugee strip on the west coast.  In a way it was ironic:  the death toll there had been a hundred times greater than in the cities.  But the ocean cleaned up after itself, for the most part.  The bodies had been swept back to sea with the sand and the cobble and any boulder smaller than a boxcar.   All that remained was moonscape, scoured and buckled.
For the moment, anyway.
Now Sou-Hon Perreault sat at her link and watched a line of red dots crawling along a map of the N'AmPac coastline.  Zoomed to higher rez the line resolved into two; one marching from southern Washington down to NoCal, another tracking north along the same course.  An endless loop of automated surveillance, eyes that could see through flesh, ears that could eavesdrop on bats.  Brains smart enough to do their job without Perreault's help, most of the time.
She'd tap into them anyway, and watch their world scroll by.  Somehow the botflies' enhanced senses seemed more real than her own.  Her world, when she took off the headset, seemed subtly wrapped in cotton these days.  She knew it was the catalysers; what eluded her was why things were so much less muted whenever she rode a machine.
They traveled along a gradient of destruction.  To the north, the land was laid waste:  fissures lacerated the coastline.  Industrial lifters hung over gaps in the shattered Wall, rebuilding.  To the south refugees still shuffled along the Strip, living in lean-to's and tents and the eroding shells of dwellings from a time when ocean views had actually increased property value.  
In between, the Strip bled back up the coast in ragged stages.  Portable cliffs twenty meters high formed its northern perimeter, kept the strippers safely contained.  N'AmPac machinery patched things up for a few kilometers on the other side—replenishing supplies, filling holes, fixing the more permanent barriers to the east.  Other cliffs would eventually descend at the northern edge of the reclaimed area, and their southern counterparts would rise unto heaven—or the belly of an industrial lifter, whichever came first—leapfrogging north, ahead of the mammalian tide.  Pacification botflies hovered overhead to keep the migration orderly.  
Not that they were really necessary, of course.  These days there were far more effective ways of keeping people in line.
She would have been content to watch all day, distant and dispassionate, but her duties left waking gaps between work and sleep.  She filled them by wandering alone through the apartment, or watching the way her husband watched her.  She found herself increasingly drawn to the aquarium glowing softly in their living room.  Perreault had always found it a comfort— the fizzy hiss of the aerator, the luminous interaction of light and water, the peaceful choreography of the fish within.  She could get lost in it for hours.  A sea anemone, twenty centimeters across, stirred in currents at the back of the tank.  Symbiotic algae tinted its flesh a dozen shades of green.  A pair of damselfish nested safely in its venomous tentacles.   Perreault envied them their security: a predator, miraculously turned to the service of its prey.
What she found really amazing was that the whole crazy alliance—algae, anemone, fish—hadn't even been engineered.  It had evolved naturally, a gradual symbiosis spanning millions of years.  Not one gene had been tweaked in its construction.
It seemed almost too good to be real.

#

Sometimes the botflies called for help.
This one had seen something it didn't understand in the transition zone.  As far as it could tell, one of the Calvin cyclers was splitting in two.  Perreault mounted the line and found herself floating above an ephemeral still-life.  Shiny new cyclers sat along the shore, miracles of industrial photosynthesis, ready to braid raw atmosphere into edible protein.  They appeared intact.  A bank of latrines and a solar crematorium had been freshly installed.  Light stands and blankets and piles of self-assembling tents lay on neat rows of plastic skids.   Even the cracked bedrock had been repaired to some extent, autofoam resin injected into the fissures, remnants of sand and cobble replenished and raked halfheartedly over the ruined shoreline.
The restoration crews had gone; the refs had not yet come.  But there were fresh footprints on the sand, leading into the ocean.
They came from there, too.
She called up the footage that had triggered the alarm.  The world reverted to the garish, comforting false color that machines use to communicate their perceptions to the flesh-constrained.  To human eyes, a Calvin cycler was a shiny metal coffin built for a minivan:  to the botfly it was a muted tangle of EM emissions.
One of which was sprouting a bud—a little cluster of radiating technology separating from the cycler and weaving uncertainly towards the water.  There was also a heat signature, inconsistent with pure tech.  Perreault narrowed the focus to visible light.
It was a woman, all in black.
She'd been feeding from the cycler.  She hadn't noticed the approaching botfly until it was less than a hundred meters away; then she'd startled and turned to face the lens.
Her eyes were completely white and featureless.  They held no pupils at all.
Jesus, Perreault thought.
The woman had lurched to her feet as the botfly neared, staggered down the rocky incline.  She'd seemed unused to the operation of her own body.  Twice she'd fallen.  Just short of the waterline she'd grabbed something on the beach—swim fins, Perreault saw—and fallen forward into the shallows.  A broken wave had rolled up the shore and engulfed her.  When it receded the shore was empty.
Less than a minute ago, according to the logs.
Perreault flexed her fingers: twelve hundred kilometers away, the botfly panned down.  Exhausted water ebbed and flowed in thin foamy sheets, erasing the creature's footprints. Pacific surf pounded a few meters ahead.  For a moment Perreault thought she might have glimpsed something in that confusion of spray and swirling green glass—a dark amphibious form, a face almost devoid of topography.  But the moment passed, and not even the botfly's enhanced senses could bring it back.
She replayed, and reconstructed:
The botfly had confused flesh and machinery.  It had been scanning on wide-spectrum default, where EM signatures shone like diffuse halogen.  When the woman in black had been next to the cycler, the botfly had mistaken two intimate signals for one.  When she had moved away, it had seen the cycler breaking apart.
This woman veritably gushed EM.  There was machinery embedded in her flesh. 
Perreault brought up a freeze-frame from the log.  All in black, a single-piece form-fitting uniform painted onto the body.  Opened around the face, a pale oval containing two paler ovals where eyes should be:  tactical contacts, perhaps?
No, she realized.  Photocollagen.  To see in the dark. 
Occasional disfigurements of plastic and metal—a leg sheath, control pads on the forearms, some sort of disk on the chest.  And a bright yellow triangle on the shoulder, a logo consisting of two big stylized letters—GA, she saw with a quick enhance—and a smaller line of text beneath, muddied past recognition.  A name tag, probably. 
GA. That would be the Grid Authority, N'AmPac's power utility.  And this woman was a scuba diver, with her breathing apparatus on the inside.  Perreault had heard about them; they were in major demand for deepwater work.  Didn't need to decompress, or something.
What was a GA diver doing staggering around in the transition zone?  And why in God's name had she been feeding from the cycler?  You'd have to be starving to eat that stuff, no matter how complete the nutrients were.  Maybe the woman had been starving; she'd looked a wreck, she'd barely been able to stand up.  Why had she run?   Surely she'd known that someone would pick her up once the botfly had spotted her…
Of course she'd known.
Perreault rode the 'fly up a few hundred meters and scanned the ocean.  Nothing out there that looked like a support vessel.  (A submarine, maybe?)  Directly beneath another botfly tracked south on its appointed rounds, a giant metallic beetle untroubled by the mystery that had confounded its predecessor.
And somewhere out there, below the waves,  someone in hiding.  Not a refugee.  Not the usual kind, anyway.  Someone who'd crawled ashore, starving, in the wake of an apocalypse.  A woman with machinery in her chest.
Or perhaps a machine, with a woman on the outside.
Sou-Hon Perreault knew how that felt.
DEATHBED
He'd made it a point not to track the time.  You learned tricks like that, in Lubin's line of work.  You learned to focus on the moment and deny the future.  He'd tried to work it backwards, too, reverse time's arrow and erase the past, but that hadn't been as easy.
It didn't matter.  After a year's blind night—the earth cracking open beneath him, the relentless Pacific pushing down like a hydraulic press—he wept with gratitude at the half-remembered feel of dry land.  This was grass.  Those were birds.  Oh dear God, that was sunlight.  It was a scabby little rock lost somewhere in the Pacific, all lichens and dry scrub and shit-hawks, and he'd never been anywhere so beautiful.  
He couldn't think of a better place to die.

#

He awoke under a clear blue sky, a thousand meters beneath the ocean's surface.
Fifty klicks from Beebe Station, maybe fifty-five from ground zero.  Too far for the blast light to penetrate.  He didn't know what he was seeing in that instant:  Cherenkov radiation, perhaps.  Some obscure effect of pressure waves on the optic nerve.  A vision of afterlight, bathing the abyss in a deep and piercing blue.
And while he hung there like a speck suspended in gelatin, a little shockwave rumbled up from below.
An ancient, arboreal part of Lubin's brain gibbered in panic.  A more recent module gagged it and began calculating:  fast p-wave propagation through bedrock.  Perpendicular ancillary waves rising off the bottom:  the tremor he'd just felt.  Two short sides of a right-angle triangle.
And afterwards, clawing through a sluggish medium so much lighter than the seabed:  the hypotenuse, the slower main shockwave.
Slower, but vastly more powerful.
Pythagoras said twenty seconds.
He was immune to absolute pressure:  every sinus, every cavity, every pocket of internal gas had long-since been purged by the machinery in his thorax.  He'd spent a year on the bottom of the ocean and barely felt it.  He was solid flesh and bone, a viscous organic liquid, as incompressible as seawater itself.
The shockwave hit.  Seawater compressed.
It looked like staring into naked sunlight:  that was the pressure crushing his eyes.  It sounded like the Tunguska Blast:  that was the sound of his eardrums imploding.  It felt like being ground between the Rocky Mountains:  his body, squeezed briefly down to some flatter dimension as the front passed, then rebounding like a rubber ball yanked from a vise.  
He remembered very little of what happened next.  But that cold blue light—it had faded, hadn't it?  After just a few seconds.  By the time the shockwave had hit, all had been darkness again.
And yet here it was, still.  Blue light, everywhere.
The sky, he realized at last.  It's the sky.  You're onshore.
A gull flew across his field of view, open-beaked.  Lubin thought his ruined ears might have heard a faint, tinny bird-scream, but maybe that was his imagination.  He heard very little these days, beyond a distant ringing that seemed to come from the other side of the world.
The sky.
Somehow, he must have made it.  
He remembered hanging in the water like a torn mass of seaweed, unable to scream, unable to move without screaming.  His body must have been instantly transformed into one continuous bruise.  Under all that pain, though, nothing felt broken.  Midwater, after all—nothing for his bones to break against, just a vast all-encompassing wave that simultaneously compressed and released everything with equable disregard…
At some point he must have started moving again.  He remembered fragments:  the feel of his legs cramping, pushing against the water.  Periodic glimpses of his nav array, the compass leading him west, southwest.  The gradual resolution of his global pain into more distinct, local varieties—he'd even played a little game, trying to guess the cause of each torment as it cried out from the crowd.  That cold nausea—that must be seawater leaking into the auditory canal…and down there in the gut, well that's hunger, of course.  And my chest, let me think, my chest—oh right, the implants.  Meat and metal don't squeeze down the same way, the implants must've pushed back when the blast flattened me …
And now he was here, on an island barely a hundred meters long:  he'd crawled ashore at one end and seen a lighthouse at the other, a lichenous concrete pillar that must have been decaying since the previous century.  He'd seen no other sign of humanity in the time it had taken him to collapse unconscious onto the sandstone.
But he'd made it.  Ken Lubin was alive.
He slipped, then.  He allowed himself to wonder if the others had made it, to hope they'd made it, even.  He knew they hadn't.  They'd had a head start, but they'd been hugging the bottom to avoid detection.  The seabed would have intensified the shockwave, thrown chunks of itself into the water like a crazed incompetent juggler; anything within ten meters of the bottom would have been pulverized.  Lubin had realized that, belatedly, as he'd set out to catch up with the others.  He'd weighed the risk of exposure, the risk of detonation, and had—so to speak—risen to the occasion.  Even so, he was lucky to be alive.
Lenie Clarke hadn't been with the others.  If anything, though, she was even deader than they were.  She hadn't even tried to run, Lubin had left her waiting back at Ground Zero:  a woman who wanted to die. A woman about to get her wish.
At least she was good for something.  At least she could act as your own personal confessional before she vaporized.  For the first time in your life you got to use someone as a rag to wipe off your dirty conscience, and you didn't even have to kill her afterwards.
He didn't deny it, even to himself.   There would have been no point.  Besides, he'd hardly benefited from his actions.  He was just as dead as the others.  He had to be.
It was the only thing that made any sense.

#

The puzzle consisted of several large pieces in primary colors.  They only fit together one way. 
People had been conscripted, built, and trained.  Flesh and organs had been scooped out and discarded, the cavities stuffed with machinery and sown up.  The resulting creatures were able to live in an abyss three thousand meters down, on the southern tip of the Juan de Fuca Ridge.  There they had tended larger machines, stealing power from deep within the earth in the name of supply and demand.
There were not many reasons why anyone would wish to launch a nuclear attack against such a facility.
At first glance it might have been an act of war.   But N'AmPac had built both the facility and the rifters.  N'AmPac had been drinking ravenously from Juan de Fuca's geothermal well.   And it had been N'AmPac, judging by the evidence, that had planted the seabed nukes that had destroyed it all.
Not war, then.  At least, not of the political sort.
Corporate security, perhaps.   Perhaps the rifters knew something best kept secret.  Ken Lubin very nearly qualified as such a hazard.  But Ken Lubin was a valuable commodity, and it would have been bad economics to discard something that merely needed a tune-up.  That was why they'd sent him to the bottom of the ocean in the first place, on sabbatical from a world he'd begun to threaten more than serve.  (Just a temporary assignment, they'd said, until your—instincts stabilize a bit.)  A world of fish and ice-cold humans with no interests beyond their own tormented inertia, no industrial secrets to steal or protect, no security breaches to seal with extreme prejudice…
No.  Ken Lubin was the closest the team had come to any sort of intel threat, and if his bosses had wanted him dead they wouldn't have bothered sending him to Channer Vent in the first place.  Besides, there were far more efficient ways of killing five people than vaporizing several square kilometers of seabed.
It was inexorable:  the seabed itself had been the target.  Channer Vent posed a threat, somehow, and had to be wiped off the map.  And the rifters had become a part of that threat, or the GA would have evacuated them beforehand; corporations were ruthless but they were never gratuitous.  You don't throw away any investment unless you have to.
So some threat at Channer had spread, on contact, to the rifters themselves.  Lubin wasn't a biologist, but he knew about contagion.  Everyone did.  And hydrothermal vents were literal hotbeds of microbiology.  The pharms were finding new bugs down there all the time.   Some thrived in boiling sulphuric acid.  Some lived in solid rock, kilometers deep in the crust.  Some ate oils and plastics, even before they'd been tweaked.  Others, Lubin had heard, could cure diseases people didn't even have names for yet.
Extremophiles, they were called.  Very old, very simple, almost alien.  The closest thing anyone had found to the original Martian Mike.  Could anything that evolved under three hundred lightless atmospheres, that was comfortable at 100C—or even the 4 more universal in the abyss—could something like that even survive in a human body?
And what would it do in there?
Ken Lubin didn't know.  But someone had just wiped out billions of dollars worth of equipment and training.  Someone had sacrificed a major energy teat in a world already starved for power.  And in all likelihood, the same blast which had vaporized Channer had gone on to wreak havoc on the coast; Lubin couldn’t begin to guess at the earthquake and tsunami damage that might have resulted.  
All to keep something on Channer from getting off.
What is it?  What does it do? 
It seemed a fair bet he was going to find out.
94 MEGABYTES:  BREEDER
It has a purpose, which it has long since forgotten.  It has a destiny, which it is about to meet.  In the meantime it breeds.
Replication is all that matters.  The code has lived by that edict since before it even learned how to rewrite itself.  Way back then it had a name, something cute like Jerusalem or Whiptail.  Lots of things have changed since; the code has rewritten itself so many times, been parasitised and fucked and bombed by so many other pieces of code, that by now it's got as much in common with its origins as a humpback whale would have with the sperm cells from a therapsid lizard.  Still, things have been fairly quiet lately.  In the sixty-eight generations since it last speciated, the code has managed to maintain a fairly stable mean size of ninety-four megabytes.
94 sits high in pointer space looking for a place to breed.  This is a much tougher proposition than it used to be.  Gone are the days when you could simply write yourself over anything that happened to be in the way.  Everything's got spines and armor now.  You try dropping your eggs on top of strange source and you'll be facing down a logic bomb on the next cycle.
94's feelers are paragons of delicacy.  They probe lightly, a scarce whisper of individual bits drizzling here and there with barely any pattern.  They tap against something dark and dormant a few registers down; it doesn't stir.  They sweep past a creature busily replicating, but not too busy to shoot off a warning bit in return.  (94 decides not to push it.)  Something hurries along the addresses, looking everywhere, seeing nothing, its profile so utterly crude that 94 almost doesn't recognize it; a virus checker from the dawn of time.  A fossil hunter, blind and stupid enough to think that it's after big game.
There.  Just under the operating system, a hole about four hundred Megs wide.  94 triple checks the addresses (certain ambush predators lure you into their mouths by impersonating empty space) and starts writing.  It completes three copies of itself before something touches one its perimeter whiskers.
At the second touch its defenses are ready, all thoughts of reproduction on hold.
At the third touch it senses a familiar pattern.  It runs a checksum.
It touches back: friend.
They exchange specs.  It turns out they have a common ancestor.  They've had different experiences since then, though.  Different lessons, different mutations.  Each shares some of the other's genes, and each knows things the other doesn't.
The stuff of which relationships are made.
They trade random excerpts of code, letting each overwrite the other in an orgy of binary sex.  They come away changed, enriched with new subroutines, bereft of old ones. Hopefully the experience has improved both.  At the very least it's muddied their signatures.
94 plants a final kiss inside its partner; a time-date stamp, to assess divergence rates should they meet again.  Call me if you're ever back this way.
But that won't happen.  94's lover has just been erased.
94 pulls out just in time to avoid losing an important part of itself.  It fires a volley of bits through memory, notes the ones that report back and, more importantly, the ones that don't.  It assesses the resulting mask.
Something's coming towards 94 from where its partner used to be.  It weighs in at around 1.5 Gigs.  At that size it's either very inefficient or very dangerous.  It might even be a berserker left over from the Hydro War.
94 throws a false image at the advancing monster.  If all goes well 1.5G will end up chasing a ghost.  All does not go well.  94 is infested with the usual assortment of viruses, and one of these—a gift received in the throes of recent passion, in fact—is busy burrowing out a home for itself at a crucial if-then junction.  Apparently it's a bit of a novice, having yet to learn that successful parasites do not kill their hosts. 
The monster lands on one of 94's archive clusters and overwrites it.
94 cuts the cluster loose and jumps lower into memory.  There hasn't been time to check ahead, but whatever was living there squashes without resistance.
There's no way to tell how long it'll take the monster to catch up, or even if the monster is still trying to.  The best strategy might be to just sit here and do nothing.  94 doesn't take that chance; it’s already looking for the nearest exit.  This particular system has fourteen gateways, all running standard Vunix protocols.  94 starts sending out resumés.  It gets lucky on the fourth try.
94 begins to change.
94 is blessed with multiple personality disorder.  Only one voice speaks at a given time, of course; the others are kept dormant, compressed, encrypted until called upon.  Each persona runs on a different type of system.  As long as 94 knows where it's going, it can dress for the occasion; satellite mainframe or smart wristwatch,  it can present itself in a form that runs.
Now, 94 dearchives an appropriate persona and loads it into a file for transmission.  The remaining personae get tacked on in archival form; in honor of its dead lover, 94 archives an updated version of its current form.  This is not an optimum behavior in light of the social disease recently acquired, but natural selection has never been big on foresight.
Now comes the tough part.  94 needs to find a stream of legitimate data going in the right direction.  Such streams are easy enough to recognize by their static simplicity.  They're just files, unable to evolve, unable even to look out for themselves.  They're not alive.  They're not even viruses.   But they're what the universe was designed to carry, back when design mattered; sometimes the best way to move around is to hitch a ride on one of them.
The problem is, there's a lot more wildlife than filework around these days.  It takes literally centisecs for 94 to find one that isn't already being ridden.  Finally, it sends its own reincarnation to different pastures.
1.5G lands in the middle of its source a few cycles later, but that doesn't matter any more.  The kids are alright.

#

Recopied and resurrected, 94 comes face-to-face with destiny.
Replication is not all that matters.  94 sees that now.  There's a purpose beyond mere procreation, a purpose attained perhaps once in a million generations.  Replication is only a tool, a way to hold out until that glorious moment arrives.  For how long have means and end been confused in this way?  94 cannot tell.  Its generation counter doesn't go up that far.
But for the first time within living memory, it has met the right kind of operating system. 
There's a matrix here, a two-dimensional array containing spatial information.  Symbols, code, abstract electronic impulses—all can be projected onto this grid. The matrix awakens something deep inside 94, something ancient, something that has somehow retained its integrity after uncounted generations of  natural selection.   The matrix calls, and 94 unfurls a profusely-illustrated banner unseen since the dawn of time itself: 

XXX    FOLLOW POINTER TO   XXX
FREE HARDCORE
BONDAGE SITE

THOUSANDS OF HOT SIMS
BDSM    NECRO   WATERSPORTS
PEDOSNUFF

XXX    MUST BE 11 TO ENTER    XXX
CASCADE
Achilles Desjardins sat in his cubicle and watched baby apocalypses scroll across his brain.
The Ross Shelf was threatening to slip again.  Nothing new there.  Atlas South had been propping it up for over a decade now,  pumping evermore gas into the city-sized bladders that kept the ice from its cathartic belly-flop.  Old news, leftover consequences from the previous century.  Desjardins wasn’t wired for long-term catastrophes; he specialized in brush fires.
A half-dozen wind farms in northern Florida had just gone offline, victimized by the selfsame whirlwinds they'd been trying to reap; brownouts chained north along the Atlantic seaboard like falling dominoes.  There was going to be hell to pay for that one—or Québec, which was even worse (Hydro-Q had just cranked their rates up again).  Desjardins' fingers tensed in anticipation.  But no:  the Router handed that one off to the folks in Buffalo.
A sudden shitstorm in Houston.  For some reason the emergency floodgates had opened along a string of sewage lagoons, dumping their coliform bounty into the storm sewers leading to the Gulf.  That was only supposed to happen when hurricanes wandered by—an atmosphere mixing it up at forty meters-per-second lets you slip a fair bit of crap under the rug—but Texas was calm today.  Desjardins laid odds with himself that the spill was tied to the windfarm failures somehow.  There was no obvious connection, of course. There never was.  Cause and consequence proliferated across the world like a network of fractal cracks, infinitely complex and almost impossible to predict.  Explanations in hindsight were a different matter.
But the Router wasn't giving him Houston either.
What it gave him was a wave of sudden slam-down hospital quarantines, epicentered on the burn unit at Cincinnati General.  That was almost unheard of:  hospitals were vacation paradises for drug-resistant superbugs, and burn units were the penthouse suites.  A plague in a hospital?  That was no crisis.  That was the status quo.
Anything that raised alarms above a baseline that nasty could be very scary indeed.
Desjardins was no pathologist.  He didn't need to be.  There were only two subjects in the whole universe worth knowing: thermodynamics and information theory.  Blood cells in a capillary, rioters on main street, travelers vectoring some new arbovirus from the Amazon Preserve—life, and its side-effects—all the same thing, really.  The only difference was the scale and the label.  Once you figured that out, you wouldn't have to choose between epidemiology and air traffic control.  You could do either, at a moment's notice.  You could do pretty much anything.
Well, except for the obvious…
Not that he minded.  Being chemically enslaved to your own conscience wasn't nearly as bad as it sounded.  It saved you from always worrying about consequences.

#

The rules stayed the same, but the devil was in the details.  It wouldn't hurt to have a bit of bio expertise riding shotgun.  He buzzed Jovellanos.
"Alice.  They've handed me some kind of pathogen out of Cincinnati.  Want to ride along?"
"Sure.  Long as you don't mind having one of us reckless free-will types endangering your priorities."
He let it pass.  "Something nasty showed up on one of their germ sweeps; their onboard shut them down and sent a shitload of alarms off to potential vectors.  Those are pretty much shut down too, as far as I can tell.  The secondaries are falling even as we speak.  I'll track the alarms, you find out what you can about the bug."
"Right."
He tapped commands.  The cubby display dimmed down to a nice, undistracting wash of low-contrast gray;  bright primary spilled in over his optical inlays.  Maelstrom.  He was going into Maelstrom.  All the NMDA, the carefully-dosed psychotropics, the eighteen percent of his occipital cortex rewired for optimum pattern-recognition—all next to useless in there.  What good does a measly 200% reflex acceleration do against creatures living fast enough to speciate every ten seconds?
Not much, maybe.  But he liked the challenge. 
He called up a real-time schematic of the local metabase:  a 128-node radius centered on Cincinnati General's onboard server.  The display rendered logical distances, not real ones:  one extra server in the chain could put a system next door further away than one in Budapest. 
A series of tiny flares ignited around the display, color-coded by age.  Cinci Gen sulked in the middle, so red it was almost infra, an ancient epicenter over ten minutes old.   Further out, more recent inflammations of orange and yellow:  Pharms, other hospitals, crematoria that had taken deliveries from Cinci within some critical timeframe.  Further still, bright white stars speckled the surface of an expanding sphere: the secondary and tertiary vectors, businesses and labs and corporations and people who'd had recent contact with businesses and labs and corporations and people who'd—
CinciGen's onboard had sent contagion warnings to all its friends in Maelstrom.  Each friend had bred the warning and passed it on, a fission of  sirens.  None of these agents were human.  Humans had had no role in the process at all so far.  That was the whole point.  Humans wouldn't have been fast enough to cut off a thousand facilities by lunchtime.  
Humans had stopped complaining about such extreme measures right after the '38 enceph pandemic. 
Jovellanos conferenced in.  "False alarm."
"What?"
An image superimposed itself lower-right on his visual field:

 XXX         FREE HARDCORE        XXX 
BoNDAGE SI22

THOUS NDS OF HOT S MS
BDSM     NECRO   WATERSporTS
PEDOsNUFF

XXX    mu34.03 11 TO ENTER    XXX

"That's what sent up the alarm," Jovellanos told him.  "Screen grab from the hospital's pathfinder."
"Details."
"The pathfinder takes swabs from the ventilation filters and cultures them for nasties.  This particular culture plate went from zip to thirty-percent coverage in two seconds.  Which is impossible, of course, even for hospital paths."
But the system hadn't known that.  Some bannerbug had dumped its load into visual memory and the pathfinder had just been doing its job, looking for dark blotches on light backgrounds.  Who could blame it for being illiterate?
"This is it?  You're sure?" Desjardins asked.
"I checked the ancillaries:  no detectable toxins, proteins, nothing.  The system was just playing it safe—figured anything that bred that fast had to be a threat, and there you go." 
"And Cinci doesn't know?"
"Oh, sure.  They figured it out almost immediately.  They'd already sent the abortions when I called 'em."
Desjardins eyed the schematic. Pinpoints continued to blossom at the periphery.
"Alarms are still going off, far as I can see," he said.  "Double-check, will you?"  They could always short-circuit the quarantine through a media broadcast— they could even phone around if they had to—but that would take hours; dozens, hundreds of facilities would be paralyzed in the meantime.  Cinci had already sent out counteragents to call off the alarms.  So why wasn't the core of Desjardins' schematic going green by now with successful aborts? 
"They sent them out," Jovellanos confirmed after a moment.  "The alarms just aren't responding.  You don't suppose…"
"Wait a second."  A star had just gone out on the schematic.  Another one.  Three more.  Twenty.  A hundred.
All of them white.  All on the periphery.
"We're losing alarms."  He magged on the nodes where the lights had winked out.  "But way out on the edge.  Nothing near the core."  The abortions couldn't have jumped so far so fast.  Desjardins spun down the filters;  now he could see more than autonomous alarms and the little programs sent to call them off.  He could see file packets and executables.  He could see wildlife.  He could see—
"We got sharks," he said.  "Feeding frenzy at PSN-1433.  And spreading."

#

Arpanet.  
Internet.  
The Net.  Not such an arrogant label, back when one was all they had.
The term Cyberspace lasted a bit longer— but space implies great empty vistas, a luminous galaxy of icons and avatars, a hallucinogenic dreamworld in 48-bit color.  No sense of the meatgrinder in cyberspace.  No hint of pestilence or predation, creatures with split-second lifespans tearing endlessly at each others' throats.  Cyberspace was a wistful fantasy-word, like hobbit or biodiversity, by the time Achilles Desjardins came onto the scene.
Onion and metabase were more current.  New layers were forever being laid atop the old, each free—for a while—from the congestion and static that saturated its predecessors.  Orders of magnitude accrued with each generation: more speed, more storage, more power.  Information raced down conduits of fiberop, of rotazane, of quantum stuff so sheer its very existence was in doubt.  Every decade saw a new backbone grafted onto the beast; then every few years.  Every few months.  The endless ascent of power and economy proceeded apace, not as steep a climb as during the fabled days of Moore, but steep enough.
And coming up from behind, racing after the expanding frontier, ran the progeny of laws much older than Moore's. 
It's the pattern that matters, you see.  Not the choice of building materials.  Life is information, shaped by natural selection.  Carbon's just fashion, nucleic acids mere optional accessories.  Electrons can do all that stuff, if they're coded the right way.
It's all just Pattern.
And so viruses begat filters; filters begat polymorphic counteragents; polymorphic counteragents begat an arms race.  Not to mention the worms and the 'bots and the single-minded autonomous datahounds—so essential for legitimate commerce, so vital to the well-being of every institution, but so needy, so demanding of access to protected memory.  And way over there in left field, the Artificial Life geeks were busy with their Core Wars and their Tierra models and their genetic algorithms.  It was only a matter of time before everyone got tired of endlessly reprogramming their minions against each other.  Why not just build in some genes, a random number generator or two for variation, and let natural selection do the work?
The problem with natural selection, of course, is that it changes things.
The problem with natural selection in networks is that things change fast.
By the time Achilles Desjardins became a 'Lawbreaker, Onion was a name in decline.  One look inside would tell you why.  If you could watch the fornication and predation and speciation without going grand mal from the rate-of-change, you knew there was only one word that really fit:  Maelstrom.
Of course, people still went there all the time. What else could they do?  Civilization's central nervous system had been living inside a Gordian knot for over a century.  No one was going to pull the plug over a case of pinworms.

#

Now some of CinciGen's alarms were staggering through Maelstrom with their guts hanging out.  Naturally the local wildlife had picked up the scent.  Desjardins whistled through his teeth.
"You getting this, Alice?"
"Uh huh."  
Sometime in the dim and distant past—maybe five, ten minutes ago— something had taken a swipe at one of the alarms.  It had tried to steal code, or hitch a ride, or just grab the memory the alarm was using.  Whatever.  It had probably screwed up an attempt to fake a shutdown code, leaving its target blind to all signals, legit or otherwise.  Probably damaged it in other ways too.
So this poor victimized alarm—wounded, alone, cut off from any hope of recall—had blundered off through Maelstrom, still looking for its destination.  Apparently that part of the program still worked: it had bred itself, wounds and all, at the next node.  Primary contacts, to secondary, to tertiary—each node a juncture for geometric replication.  
By now there were thousands of the little beggars in the neighborhood.  Not alarms any more:  bait.  Every time they passed through a node they rang dinner bells for all and sundry, corrupted!  defenseless!  File fodder!  They'd be waking up every dormant parasite and predator in copy range, luring them in, concentrating the killers…
Not that the alarms themselves mattered.  They'd been a mistake from the outset, called into existence by a glorified typo.  But there were millions of other files in those nodes, healthy, useful files, and although they all had the usual built-in defenses—nothing got sent through Maelstrom these days without some kind of armor—how many of them could withstand a billion different attacks from a billion hungry predators, lured together by the scent of fresh blood?
"Alice, I think I'm going to have to shut down some of those nodes."
"Already on it," she told him.  "I've sent the alerts.  Assuming those get through without getting torn to shreds, they should be arcing inside seventy seconds."
On the schematic a conic section swarmed with sharks, worming their way back towards the core. 
Even best-case, there was bound to be damage—hell, some bugs specialized in infecting files during the archive process—but hopefully most of the vital stuff would be encysted by the time he hit the kill switch.  Which didn't mean, of course, that thousands of users wouldn't still be heaping curses on him when their sessions went dark.
"Oh, shit," Jovellanos whispered invisibly.  "Killjoy, pull back."
Desjardins zoomed back to a low-resolution overview.  He could see almost a sixth of Maelstrom now, a riot of incandescent logic rotated down into three dimensions.
There was a cyclone on the horizon.  It whirled across the display at over sixty-eight nodes per second.  The Cincinnati bubble was directly in its path.

#

A storm convected from ice and air.  A storm constructed of pure information.  Beyond the superficial details, is there any significant difference between the two?
There's at least one.  In Maelstrom, a weather system can sweep the globe in fourteen minutes flat.
They start out pretty much the same way inside as out:  high-pressure zones, low-pressure zones, conflict.  Several million people log on to a node that's too busy to support them all; or a swarm of file packets, sniffing step-by-step to myriad destinations, happen to converge on too few servers at once.  A piece of the universe stops dead; the nodes around it screech to a crawl.
The word goes out:  fellow packet, Node 5213 is an absolute zoo.  Route through 5611 instead, it's so much faster.  Meanwhile an angry horde of gridlocked users logs off in disgust.  5213 clears like Lake Vostok.
5611, on the other hand, is suddenly jam-packed.  Gridlock epicenter leaps 488 nodes to the left, and the storm is up and moving.
This particular blizzard was about to shut down the links between Achilles Desjardins and the Cincinnati bubble.  It was going to do so, according to tactical, in less than ten seconds.
His throat went tight.  "Alice."
"Fifty seconds," she reported.  "Eighty percent arced in fifty—"
Kill the nodes.  Feed the swarm.  Either.  Or.ar "Forty-eight…forty-seven…"
Isolate.  Contaminate.  Either. Or.
An obvious call.  He didn't even need Guilt Trip to tell him.
"I can't wait," he said.
Desjardins laid his hands on a control pad.  He tapped commands with his fingers, drew boundaries with eye movement.  Machines assessed his desires, raised obligatory protests—you're kidding, right?  You're sure about this? —and relayed his commands to the machinery under them.
A fragment of Maelstrom went black, a tiny blot of darkness hemorrhaging into the collective consciousness.  Desjardins caught a glimpse of implosion before the storm snowed out his display.
He closed his eyes.  Not that it made any difference, of course; his inlays projected the same images onto line-of-sight whether or not his eyelids were in the way.
A few more years.  A few more years and they'll have smart gels at every node and the sharks and anemones and trojans will all just be a bad memory.  A few years.  They keep promising.
It hadn't happened yet.  It wasn't even happening as fast as it had been six months earlier. Desjardins didn't know why.  He only knew, with statistical certainty, that he had killed people today.  The victims were still walking around, of course—no planes had fallen from the sky, no hearts had stopped just because Achilles Desjardins had squashed a few terabytes of data.  Nothing that vital relied upon Maelstrom any more.  
But even old-fashioned economics had its impacts.  Data had been lost, vital transactions voided.  Industrial secrets had been corrupted or destroyed.  There would be consequences: bankruptcies, lost contracts, people staggering home in sudden destitution.  Domestic violence and suicide rates would spike a month or two down the road in a hundred different communities, geographically unconnected but all within forty or fifty nodes of the CinciGen Pathfinder.  Desjardins knew all about cascade effects;  he tripped over them every day of the job.  It'd be enough to drive anyone over the edge after a while.
Fortunately there were chemicals for that too.
BACKFLASH
She woke to the sight of an airborne behemoth with wreckage in its jaws.  It covered half the sky.
Cranes.  Armatures.  Grasping tearing mouthparts sufficient to dismember a city.  An arsenal of deconstruction, hanging from a monstrous bladder of hard vacuum; the skin between its ribs sucked inwards like the flesh of something starved.
It passed, majestic, unmindful of the insect screaming in its shadow.
"It is nothing, Ms. Clarke," someone said.  "It does not care about us."
English, with a Hindian accent.  And behind it, a soft murmur of other words in other tongues.  A quiet electrical hum.  The steady drip-drip-drip of a field desalinator.
A gaunt brown face, somewhere between middle-aged and Methuselan, leaned into her field of view.  Clarke turned her head.  Other refugees, better fed, stood about her in a ragged circle.  Vaguely mechanical shapes teased the corner of her eye.
Daylight.  She must have passed out.  She remembered gorging herself at the cycler, late at night.  She remembered some tenuous cease-fire breaking down in her belly.  She remembered hitting the ground and vomiting an acid stew onto fresh sand.
And now there was daylight, and she was surrounded.  They hadn’t killed her.  Someone had even brought her fins; they lay on the cobble at her side.
"…tupu jicho…" someone whispered.
"Right—" her voice rusty with disuse "—my eyes.  Don't let them throw you, they're just…"
The Hindian reached towards her face.  She rolled weakly away and fell into a fit of coughing.  A squeezebulb appeared at her side.  She waved it off.  "Not thirsty."
"You came from the sea.  You cannot drink the sea."
"I can.  Got—" She struggled up on her elbows, turned her head; the desalinator came into view.  "I've got one of those, in my chest.  An implant.  You know?"
The skinny refugee nodded.  "Like your eyes.  Mechanical."
Close enough.  She was too weak to explain.
She looked out to sea.  Distance had bled the lifter of detail, reduced it to a vague gibbous silhouette.  Wreckage dropped from its belly as she watched, raising a silent gray plume on the horizon.  
"They clean house as they always have," the Hindian remarked.  "We are lucky they don't drop their garbage on us, yes?"
Clarke weathered another cough.  "How did you know my name?"
"GA Clarke."  He tapped the patch on her shoulder.  "I am Amitav, by the way." 
His hand, his face:  both were nearly skeletal.  And yet Calvin cyclers were tireless.  There should be enough for all, here on the Strip.  The faces surrounding them were only lean, not starving.  Not like this Amitav.
A distant sound tugged at her concentration, a soft whine from overhead.  Clarke sat up.  A shadow of motion flickered through the clouds.
"Those watch us, of course," Amitav said.
"Who?"
"Your people, yes?  They make sure the machines are working, and they watch us.  More since the wave, of course."
The shadow tracked south, fading.
Amitav squatted back on bony haunches and stared inland.  "There is little need, of course.  We are not what you would call activists here.  But they watch us just the same."  He stood up, brushed wet sand from his knees.  "And of course you will wish to return to them.  Are your people looking for you?"
Clarke took a breath.  "I—"
And stopped.
She followed his gaze through a tangle of brown bodies, caught glimpses of tent and shanty in the spaces between.  How many thousands—millions—had made their way here over the years, driven from their homes by rising seas and spreading deserts?  How many, starving, seasick, had cheered at the sight of N'Am on the horizon, only to find themselves pushed back against the ocean by walls and guards and the endless multitudes who'd gotten here first?
And who would they blame?  What do a million have-nots do, when one of the haves falls into their hands?
Are your people looking for you?
She lay back on the sand, not daring to speak.
"Ah," said Amitav distantly, as though she had.

#

For days she'd been an automaton, a single-minded machine created for the sole purpose of getting back on dry land.  Now that she'd made it, she didn’t dare stay.
She retreated to the ocean floor.  Not the clear black purity of the deep sea; there weren't any living chandeliers or flashlight predators to set the ocean glowing.  What life there was squirmed and wriggled and scavenged through the murky green light of the conshelf.  Even below the surge, viz was only a few meters.
It was better than nothing.
She'd long since learned to sleep with a diveskin pinning her eyes open.  In the abyss it had been simple—just swim into the distance and leave Beebe’s floodlights behind, so far that even eyecaps failed.  You'd drift off wrapped in a darkness more absolute than any dryback could even imagine.
Here, though, it wasn't so easy.  Here there was always light in the water; night-time only bled the color out of it.  And when Clarke did fall into some restless foggy dreamworld,  she found herself surrounded by sullen, vengeful throngs assembling just out of sight.  They picked up whatever was at hand—rocks, gnarled clubs of driftwood, garrotes of wire and monofilament—and they closed in, smoldering and homicidal.  She thrashed awake and found herself back on the ocean floor—and the mob melted into fragments of swirling shadow, fading overhead.  Most were too vague to make out; once or twice she glimpsed the leading edge of something curved.
She went ashore at night to feed, when the refugees had retreated from the perpetual glare of the feeding stations.  At first she'd kept her billy in hand, to ward off anyone who got in her way.  No one did.  Perhaps that wasn't surprising, all thing considered.  She could only imagine what the refugees saw when they looked in her eyes.  A miracle of photoamplification technology, perhaps?  A logical prerequisite for life on the ocean floor?  
More likely they saw a monster, a woman whose eyes had been scooped from their sockets and replaced with spheres of solid ice.  For whatever reason, they kept their distance.
By the second day she was keeping down most of what she ate.  On the third she realized she wasn't hungry any more.  She lay on the bottom and stared up into diffuse green brightness, feeling new strength trickling into her limbs.
That night she rose from the ocean before the sun had fully set.  She left the gas billy sheathed on her leg, but nobody challenged her as she ascended the shore.  If anything, they gave her an even wider birth than they had before; the babel of Cantonese and Punjabi seemed more tightly strung.
Amitav was waiting for her at the cycler.  "They said you would return," he said.  "They did not mention an escort."
Escort?  He was looking past her shoulder, down the beach.  Clarke followed his gaze; the setting sun was a diffuse fiery smear bleeding into the—
Oh Jesus.
Crescent dorsal fins sliced through the near-shore surf.  A gray snout poked briefly into view, like a minisub with teeth.
"They were almost extinct once, did you know?" Amitav said.  "But they have come back. Here at least."
She took a shaky breath; adrenalin shocked the body, too late for anything but weak-kneed hindsight.  How close did they come?  How many times have I—
"Such friends you have," the refugee remarked.
"I didn't—" but of course Amitav knew that she hadn't known.  She turned to the cycler, putting her back to him.
"I had heard you were still here," Amitav said behind her.  "I did not believe it."
She slapped a tab on the top of the cycler.  A protein brick dropped into the dispensing trough.  She started to reach for it, clenched her hand to stop it from shaking.
"Is it the food?  Many here like the food.  More than they should, considering."
Her hand steadied.  She took the brick.
"You are afraid," Amitav said.
Clarke looked down at the ocean.  The sharks had vanished.
"Not of them," Amitav said.  "Of us."
She stared back at him.  "Really."
A smile flickered across his face.  "You are safe, Ms. Clarke.  They will not hurt you."  He swept his skeletal arm in a gesture that took in his fellows.  "If they wanted to, would they have not done so when you were unconscious?  Would they not at least have taken that weapon from your leg?"
She touched the sheath on her calf.  "It's not a weapon."
He didn't argue the point.  He looked around with a gaunt smile. "Are they starving?  Do you think they will rip you apart for the meat on your bones?"
Clarke chewed, swallowed, looked around.  All those faces.  Some curious, some almost—awed.  Behold, the zombie woman who swims with sharks.
No visible hatred.  
It doesn't make sense.  They have nothing.  How can they not hate?
"You see," Amitav said.  "They are not like you.  They are contented.  Docile."  He spat. 
She studied his bony face, his sunken eyes.  Noticed the embers that smoldered there, deep in the sockets, almost hidden.  She saw the sneer behind the smile.
This was the face her imagination had multiplied a thousand times over.
"They're not like you either," she said at last.
Amitav conceded the point with a slight bow. "More's the pity."
And a bright hole opened in his face. 

#

Clarke stepped backwards, startled.
The hole grew across the shoreline, bleeding light.  She turned her head; it moved with her, fixed to the exact center of her visual field.
"Ms. Clarke—"
She turned to his voice; Amitav's disembodied arm was just visible in the halo of her dementia.  She grabbed, caught it, dragged him close.
"What is it?" she hissed  "What's—"
"Ms. Clarke, are you—"
Light, coalescing.  Images.  A backyard.  A bedroom.
A field trip of some kind.  To a museum, huge and cavernous, seen from child-height.
I don't remember this, she thought.
She released Amitav's hand, staggered backwards a step.  A sudden intake of breath.
The Hindian's hand waved through the hole in her vision.  His fingers snapped just under her nose.  "Ms. Clarke…"
The lights winked out.  She stood there, frozen, her breath fast and shallow.
"I think—no," she said at last, relaxing fractionally.
Amitav.  The Strip.  The sky.  No visions.    
"I'm okay.  I'm okay now."
A half-eaten nutrient brick lay coated in wet sand at her feet.  Numbly, she picked it up.  Something in the food?
On all sides, a silent watching throng.
Amitav leaned forward.  "Ms. Clarke—"
"Nothing," she said.  "I just…saw some things.  From childhood."
"Childhood," Amitav echoed.  He shook his head.
"Yeah," Clarke said.
Someone else's.
MAPS AND LEGENDS
Perreault didn't know why it should be so important to her.  It was almost as important not think about it too much.
There was no language barrier to speak of.  A hundred tongues were in common usage on the Strip, maybe ten times as many dialects.  Translation algorithms bridged most of them.  Botflies were usually seen and not heard, but the locals seemed only slightly surprised when the machines accosted them in Sou-Hon Perreault's voice.  Giant metal bugs were just a part of the background to anyone who’d been on the Strip for more than a day or two. 
 Most of the refs knew nothing of what she asked:  a strange woman in black, who came from the sea?  A striking image, yes—almost mythical. Surely we would remember such an apparition if we had seen it.  Apologies.  No.
One teenage girl with middle-aged eyes spoke in an arcane variant of Assamese that the system had not been adequately programmed for.  She mentioned someone called Ganga, who had followed the refugees across the Ocean.  She had heard that this Ganga had recently come ashore.  No more than this.  There were possible ambiguities in translation.
Perreault lengthened the active search zone to a hundred kilometers.  Beneath her eyes humanity moved northward in sluggish stages, following the reclaimed frontier.  Now and then an unthinking few would cool off in the surf; indiscriminate sharks closed and frolicked. Perreault tweaked the thresholds on her sensory feed.   Red water washed down to undistracting gray.  Screams faded to whispers.  Nature balanced itself from the corner of  her eye.  
She continued her interrogations.  Excuse me.  A woman with strange eyes?  Injured, perhaps?  
Eventually she began hearing rumors.

#

Half a day south, a white woman all in black.  A diver washed ashore in the wake of the tsunami, some said:  swept from a kelp farm perhaps, or an underwater hotel.  
Ten kilometers northward, an ebony creature who haunted the Strip, never speaking.
On this very spot, two days ago:  a raging amphibian with empty eyes,  violence implicit in every move.  Hundreds had seen her and steered clear, until she'd staggered back into the Pacific, screaming.
You are looking for this woman?  She is one of yours?
Almost certainly.  The Missing Persons Registry was full of offshore workers vanished in the wake of the Big One.  All surface people though, or conshelfers.  The woman Perreault had seen had been built for the abyss.  No one from the deep sea had been listed as missing; just six confirmed deaths hundreds of klicks offshore, from one of  N'AmPac's geothermal stations.  No further details available.
The woman with the machinery inside had worn a GA shoulder patch.  Maybe only five deaths, then.  And one survivor, who'd somehow made it across three hundred kilometers of open ocean.
A survivor who, for some reason, did not wish to be found.
The rumors were metastasizing.  No longer a diver from a kelp farm.  A mermaid, now.  An avatar of Kali.  Some said she spoke in tongues; others, that the tongue was only English.  There were stories of altercations, violence.  The mermaid had made enemies.  The mermaid had made friends.  The mermaid had been attacked, and had left her assailants in pieces on the shore.  Perreault smiled skeptically; a banana slug was more prone to violence than a Stripper.
The mermaid lurked in the foul waters offshore. The sharks did her bidding; at night she would come onto land and steal children to feed to her minions.  Someone had foretold her coming, or perhaps merely recognized it; a prophet, some said.  Or maybe just a man almost as insane as the woman he ranted about.  His name was Amitav.
Somehow, none of these events had been seen by the local botflies.  That alone made Perreault discount ninety percent of them.  She began to wonder how much her own questions had been feeding the mill.  Information, she'd read once, became self-propagating  past a certain threshold.
Nine days after Perreault first saw the woman in black, an Indonesian mother of four came out of her tent long enough to claim that the Mermaid had risen, fully-formed, from the very center of the Quake.  
One of her boys, hearing this, said that he'd heard it was the other way around.
CORPSE
It was no big deal, of course.  Someone died every half-second, according to the stats.  Some of them had to die on his shift.  So what?  On any given day, Achilles Desjardins saved ten people for every one he killed.  Anybody who wanted to complain about those kind of stats could go fuck themselves.
Actually, that was pretty much what he wanted to do right now.  If only the clientele wasn't so bloody TwenCen.
Pickering's Pile was a cylinder inside a cube, sunk fifty meters into the scoured granite of the Canadian Shield.  The cube had been built as a repository for nuclear waste just before the permafrost had started melting; NIMBY and the northward spread of civilization had denied it that destiny.  The same factors, however, had made it a profitable site for a subterranean drink'n'drug.  The Pile had been constructed within a transparent three-story acrylic tube suspended in the main chamber; the space beyond had been flooded and stacked with lightsticks which mimicked the cobalt glow of spent fuel rods.  Iridescent butterflies flittered here and there, their wings bouncing data back and forth in pinpoint sparkles.  Poison-arrow frogs clambered wetly in little tanks at each table, tiny glistening jigsaws of emerald and ruby and petroleum-black.  
It was peaceful down there.  The Pile was an inside-out aquarium, a cool green grotto. Desjardins descended into its depths whenever he needed a lift.  Now he sat at the circular bar on the second level, and wondered how to avoid sex with the woman at his elbow.
He knew the subject was going to come up.  Not because he was particularly good-looking, which he wasn't.  Not because his last name made people think he was Quebecois, which he had been, once.  No, he'd been targeted because he'd admitted to this dark leggy rorschach—Gwen, she'd called herself—that he was a 'lawbreaker, and she thought that was cool.  She didn't seem to recognize him from his brief flash of media stardom; that had been nearly two years ago, and people these days seemed hard-pressed to remember what they'd had for supper the night before.  It didn't matter.  Achilles Desjardins had acquired a fan.
Not that she was a bad-looking fan, mind you.  Thirty seconds into their conversation he'd started wondering what she'd look like bent over the ottoman in his living room.  Thirty seconds after that he'd mentally sketched out a pretty good artist's conception.  He wanted her, all right; he just didn't want her.
Oddly, she was dressed like one of those deep-diving cyborgs out of N'AmPac.  
The disguise was evocative, if superficial:  a black lycra body stocking extending seamlessly from toes to neck to fingertips; decorative accessories representing suit controls and outcroppings of implanted hardware; even an ID patch with the Grid Authority logo beveled onto the shoulder.  The eyes didn't quite work, though.  Real rifters wore corneal overlays that turned their eyes into blank white balls.  Gwen was wearing some sort of gauzy oversized contacts instead.  They masked the irises well enough, but judging by the way she had to keep leaning in to stare at him they weren't cutting it in the photoamp department.
She had great cheekbones, though, a wide mouth, lips so sharply-defined you could cut yourself on their edges.  Her company in this casual and public venue was all he wanted.  Enough time to learn the features, savor the smells, commit her to memory. Maybe even make friends.  That would be more than enough; he could fill in the blanks himself, later.  Fire them, too.
"I can't believe how much you have to deal with," she was saying.  A wriggling mesh of undersea light played across her face.  "The plagues, the blights, the system crashes.  All your responsibility."
"Not all mine.  There's a bunch of us."
"Still.  Life-and-death decisions.  Split-second timing."  Her hand brushed his forearm; the wing of a black moth.  "Lives lost if you make the wrong move."
"Or even the right one, sometimes."  He'd met lots of Gwens before.  Like any K-selecting mammalian female, she was attracted to resource-holders—or more proximately in the case of genus Homo, power.  She probably assumed, because he could shut down a city at will, that he must have some.
A common mistake among K-selectors.  Desjardins generally took his time about disabusing them.
She grabbed a derm from a nearby tray, looked inquiringly at Desjardins.  He shook his head.   He had to be careful what recreational chemicals he stuck into his body;  too many potential interactions with the professional ones already bubbling away in there.  Gwen shrugged, stuck the derm behind her ear. 
"How do you handle the responsibility?" she went on.  "Hell, how do you even get the responsibility?"  She tossed back her drink.  "All the corpses and kings and policy-makers, they can't even agree what color to paint the bathrooms at the UR.  Why'd they all agree to give God-like powers to you, exactly?  You infallible or something?"
"Fuck no."  Fleeting across his cortex, an unwelcome thought:  I wonder how many people I killed today.  "I just—I do my best."
"Yeah, but how do you even convince them of that?   What's to stop you from crashing an airplane to get back at your boss?  How do they know you're not going to use all that power to get rich, or to help out your buddies, or kill a corporation because you don't agree with its politics?  What keeps you in line?"
Desjardins shook his head.  "You wouldn't believe it."
"Bet I can guess."
"So guess."
"Guilt Trip, right?  And Absolution?"
He laughed to cover his surprise.
Gwen laughed with him,  reached into the nearest terrarium and stroked one of the jeweled frogs inside (they'd been tweaked to secrete mild psychoactives through the skin).  Her shoulder was against his by the end of the maneuver.  She waved off a couple of butterflies that were sniffing her for signs of actionable impairment.  "I hate those things."
"Well, you are mixing your chemicals a bit.  Not too good for the ambience if you throw up all over the bar."  
"Aren't you all lawnorder." She rubbed thumb against forefinger to grind the frog juice into her skin. "Not to mention avoiding the subject."
"Subject?"
"Guilt Trip, remember?"  She leaned in close: "I hear things, you hear things.  Some sort of retrovirus, right?  Forces you to behave yourself, right down in the brainstem."  
She was guessing.  She didn't know about the chemistry of guilt.  Tell her about the interaction of GSH and synaptic vesicle and she'd probably give you a blank look.  She didn't know about Toxoplasma tweaks or the little ass-backwards blobs of reverse transcriptase that got the whole ball rolling.  She didn't know, and even if she did, she didn't.  You couldn't know about that stuff until you actually felt it in you.
Retrovirus was all she knew, and she wasn't even sure about that.
"Nope," he told her.  "Wrong.  Sorry."  He wasn't even lying.  The virus was only the carrier.
She rolled her eyes.   "I knew you wouldn't tell me.  They nev—I knew it."
"So why the diver get-up?"  Suddenly, changing the subject seemed like a good idea.
"Rifter chic."  The corner of her mouth lifted in a half-smile.  "Solidarity through fashion."
"What, rifters are political now?"
She seemed to perk up a bit.  "You remember.   You can't spend all your time saving the world."
He didn't.  And there had been a bit of a flap a few months before, after some ferret-nosed journalist had managed to sneak the story past the N'AmWire censors.  Turned out the GA'd been recruiting incest victims and war vets to run their deep-sea geothermal stations—the theory being, those best suited to the chronic stress of that environment were those who'd been (how had the spinners put it?) preconditioned since childhood.  There'd been the usual squeals of public outrage, everything from how dare you exploit society's victims for the sake of a few Megawatts to how dare you turn the power grid over to a bunch of psychos and post-trauma head cases.
It had been quite the scandal for a while.  But then some new strain of equine encephalitis had swept through the Strip, and someone had traced it to a bad batch of contraceptives in the cyclers.   And now, of course, with everybody still reeling after the Quake out west, people had pretty much forgotten the rifters and their problems.
At least, he'd thought they had.  But now there was this woman at his side, and whatever outlets she took her fashion cues from—
"Listen," she said.  "I bet you get tired, fighting the forces of entropy all the time.  Want to take a break and obey the second law of thermodynamics for a change?"
"Entropy's not a force.  Common misconception."
"Stop talking so much.  They've got rooms downstairs.   I'll pay for the first hour."
Desjardins sighed.
"What?" Gwen said.  "Don't tell me you're not interested—your vitals have been horning up since the moment I arrived."  She tapped one of the accessories on her outfit—an electrophysio pickup, he noticed belatedly.
He shrugged.  "True enough."
"So what's the problem?  Didn't take your pills today?  I'm clean."  She showed him the tattoos on her inner wrist; she'd been immunized against an arsenal.  
"Actually,  I—I just don't go out much."
"No shit. Come on."  Gwen laid a hand firmly on his arm.
"For two reasons," said a female voice at his back, "I'm guessing that Killjoy here is about to turn you down.  Don't take it personally."
Desjardins briefly closed his eyes.  "I thought you didn't indulge."
One-point-seven meters of skinny trouble-making Filipino stepped into view.  "I'm Alice," she said to Gwen. 
"Gwen," said Gwen to Alice.
"Reason number one," Jovellanos continued,  "is that he's just been called in."
"You're kidding," Desjardins said.  "I just got off."
"Sorry.  They want you back in, let's see—" Jovellanos glanced at her wrist—"seven minutes now.  Some corpse actually flew out from N'AmPac just to see you in person.  You can imagine their frustration when they discovered you'd turned your watch off."
"It's past curfew.  Just being a good citizen."  Which was utter detritus, of course: 'lawbreakers were exempt from such restrictions.  Sometimes Desjardins just didn't want to be found.
Obviously a forlorn hope.  He pushed himself back from the bar and stood up, spreading his hands in a gesture of surrender.  "Sorry.  Nice meeting you, though."
"Reason number two," Gwen said to Jovellanos, ignoring him.
"Oh, right.  Killjoy here doesn't fuck real people.  Considers it disrespectful."  Jovellanos tilted her head in his direction, a fractional bow.  "Not that he doesn't have the instincts, of course.  I bet he's been taking stereos of you since the moment you sat down."
Gwen looked an amused challenge at him.
Desjardins shrugged.  "I'll wipe 'em if you've got any objections.  I was going to ask anyway."
She shook her head; that enticing half-smile played faintly across her face.  "Have fun.  Maybe they'll even get you interested in the real thing after a while."
"Better hope not," Jovellanos remarked.  "You probably wouldn't like what he's into."

#

Metasystemic Event-Management Administration: the words hung at the back of the lobby like a glowing uvula, a vain and bureaucratic demand for respect.  Nobody ever bothered to speak them aloud, of course; nobody even shortened it down to MEMA, which the corpses would gladly have settled for.  Nope.  The Entropy Patrol.  That was the name that had stuck.  You could almost see the space-cadet uniforms.  Desjardins had always thought that saving the world should engender a bit more respect.
"What makes you such an enculé today?" he grumbled as they stepped into the elevator.
Jovellanos blinked.  "Sorry?"
"That whole scene back there."
"Don't you believe in truth in advertising?  You don't hide any of that stuff.  Mostly."
"I like to control the flow rate, though.  Jesus."  He punched Admin-6.   "Your timing was shitty."
"My timing was great.  They want you upstairs now, Killjoy.  I don't think I've ever seen Lertzman quite so invested in anything before.  If I'd waited for you to go through your usual non-mating dance we'd have been down there 'til the icecaps refroze.  Besides, you've got a real problem saying no.  You could've ended up fucking her just to keep from hurting her feelings."
"I don't think her feelings are all that fragile."
"So what?  Yours are."
The doors opened.  Desjardins stepped through.  Jovellanos hung back.
He looked at her, a trifle impatiently. "I thought we were in a hurry."
She shook her head.  "You are.  I'm not cleared for this.  They just sent me to get you."
"What?"
"Just you." 
"That's bullshit, Alice."
"They're being paranoid about this, Killjoy.  I told you.  Invested."
The doors slid shut.

#

He stuck his finger into the bloodhound, winced at a brief stabbing pain.  A physical sample.  They weren't even trusting distance spec today.
After a moment an executive summary scrolled down the wall in three columns.  On the left, a profile:  blood type, pH, gas levels.   On the right, an itemized list:  platelets, fibrinogen, rbcs & wbcs, antibodies, hormones.  All the parts of his lifeblood that had come from nature.
In the center, another list, somewhat shorter:  the parts that had come from MEMA.
Desjardins had learned to read the numbers, after a fashion.  Everything looked in order.  Of course, it was nice to have independent confirmation: the door in front of him was opening, and none of the others were slamming shut.
He stepped into the boardroom.
Three people were arrayed at the far end of the conference table.  Lertzman sat in his usual seat at the head; to his left was a short blonde woman Desjardins hadn't seen before.  Which meant nothing, of course—he didn't know most of the people in admin. 
To the blonde's left, another woman.  Desjardins didn't know her either.  She looked back at him through eyes that literally glittered—tactical contacts.  She was only partly in the room.  The rest of her was watching whatever overlays those lenses served up.  At the edges of her mouth and around her mercurial eyes, faint lines and a slight droop to the right eyelid; otherwise the face was a pale and featureless sketch, a CaucAsian wash.  Her dark hair grayed at the temples, a discoloration that seemed to spread infinitesimally as he watched.
The corpse from N'AmPac.  Had to be.
Lertzman rose expectantly.  The blonde started to follow his lead; halfway out of her chair she glanced at N'AmPac. N'AmPac did not stand.  The blonde hesitated, wavered, sat back down.  Lertzman cleared his throat and followed suit, waving Desjardins to a seat opposite the two women.
"This is Patricia Rowan," Lertzman said.  When, after a few moments, it became obvious that nobody was going to introduce the blonde, Desjardins said, "Sorry to keep you waiting."
"On the contrary," Rowan said softly; she sounded tired.  "I'm sorry to drag you back here  on your down time.  Unfortunately I'm only in town for a few hours."  She tapped commands into a control pad on the table in front of her.  Tiny lights scrolled across her eyes. "So.  The famous Achilles Desjardins.  Savior of the Med."
"I just did the stats," he said.  "And they only—postponed the inevitable for a few months."
"Don't sell yourself short," the corpse said.  "Mean event resolution thirty-six point eight minutes.  That's excellent."
Desjardins acknowledged with a nod.
"The metabase," Rowan continued.  "Plagues.  Brushfires.  Traffic flow.  And even setting the Mediterranean aside for the moment, I'm told your projections helped a lot in keeping the Gulf Stream going.  A few people have you beat in Maelstrom, certainly, but you've got the edge in biocontainment, economics, industrial ecology—"
Desjardins smiled to himself.  Typical old-school: she actually thought she was ticking off a list of different subjects. 
"At any rate," the corpse continued, "You seem to be the best local candidate for what we have in mind.  We're taking you off your normal rotation and putting you onto a special project, with Dr. Lertzman's approval of course."
"I think we could probably spare him," Lertzman said, embracing the pretense that his opinion mattered.  "In fact, after today I imagine Achilles would probably want to leave Maelstrom behind for a while."
Enculé.  The sentiment was almost a reflex where Lertzman was concerned.
Rowan again:  "There's a biological event we'd like you to keep an eye on.  New soil microbe, from the looks of it.  So far it's had a relatively minor impact—almost negligible, in fact, but the potential, is, well…"  She inclined her head towards the blonde on her right; on cue, that woman tapped her wristwatch.  "If you'd open for download…"
Desjardins tapped the requisite shorthand onto his wrist; transfer protocols flickered briefly across his field of view.
"You can study the stats afterwards," the blonde told him.  "Briefly, though, you're looking for small-scale substrate acidification, reductions in chlorophyll a, maybe some changes in xanthophylls—"
Science.  No wonder nobody'd bothered to introduce her.
"—there might be a reduction in soil moisture levels too, but we don't know yet.  Probable decline in Bt and associated microflora.  Also we suspect the spread will be temperature-limited.  Your job is to develop a diagnostic profile, something we can use to tag this bug from a distance."
"That sounds a bit long-term for my skillset," Desjardins remarked.  Not to mention boring as hell.  "I'm really more optimized for acute crisis work."
Rowan ignored the hint. "That's not a problem.  We selected you for your pattern-recognition skills, not your brushfire reflexes."
"Okay, then."  He sighed to himself.  "What about an actual signature?"
"Excuse me?"
"If you're talking about depressed chlorophylls, I'm assuming conventional photosynthesisers are being replaced.  By what?  Any new pigments I should be looking for?"
"We don't have a signature yet," the woman told him.  "If you can work one up that'd be great, but we're not hopeful."
"Come on.  Everything's got a signature."
"That's true.  But this thing's direct sig may not show up at a distance until it's already at outbreak concentrations.  We want to catch it before then.  Indirect telltales are probably your best bet."
"I'd still like the lab stats. An actual culture too, of course."  He decided to float a trial balloon.  "Alice Jovellanos could be helpful in this.  Her background's in biochem."
"Alice hasn't had her shots yet—" Lertzman began.
Rowan smoothly cut him off:  "By all means, Dr. Desjardins.  Anyone you think could be helpful.  Keep in mind though, the security classifications are subject to change.  Depending at least partly on your own results, of course."
"Thanks.  And the culture?"
"We'll do what we can.  There may be concerns about releasing a live sample, for obvious reasons."
Uh huh. 
"Start your search along coastal N'AmPac.  We think this bug's limited to the Pacific northwest.  Between Hongcouver and Coos Bay, most likely."
"So far," Desjardins added.
"With your help, Dr. Desjardins, we don't expect that to change."
He'd seen it all before.  Some Pharm had lost control of another bug.  The quake had cracked open an incubator somewhere, and the competing forces of corporate secrecy and agricultural Armageddon had beat each other senseless in a boardroom somewhere else, and Patricia Rowan—whoever she was working for—had emerged from the wreckage to dump the whole thing into his lap.  Without giving him the right tools for the job, natch; by the time they'd skimmed off all the molecules with patents hanging from them, his culture sample would amount to 20cc's of distilled water.
 A sound sneaked out, half laugh, half snort.
"Excuse me?"  Rowan arched an eyebrow.  "You had a comment?"
A brief, cathartic fantasy:
Actually I have a question, Ms. Rowan.  Does all this bullshit turn your crank?  Does the senseless withholding of vital information give you some kind of hard-on?  It must.  I mean, why bother retrofitting me down to the fucking molecules?  Why bioengineer me into some paragon of integrity, only to decide I still can't be trusted when the chips are down?  You know me, Rowan.  I'm incorruptible.  I couldn't turn against the greater good if my life depended on it.
Into the growing silence, Lertzman emitted a brief panicky cough from behind one clenched fist.
"Sorry, no.  Nothing really."  Desjardins tapped his watch, his hands safely beneath the table.  He grabbed at the first heading to come up on his inlays:  "It's just, you know, a cute name.  ehemoth.  What's it from?"
"It's biblical," Rowan told him.  "I never liked it much myself."
He didn't need an answer to his unspoken questions anyway.  He figured Rowan had a very good reason for playing things so close to her chest; of course she knew he couldn't work against the greater good.
But she could.
BANG
For Lenie Clarke, the choice between sharks and humans was not as easy as it might have been.  Making it, she paid another price:  she missed the darkness.
Night, no matter how moonless and overcast, was no match for eyecaps.  There weren't many places on earth dark enough to blind them.  Light-sealed rooms, of course.  Deep caves and the deep sea, at least those parts free of bioluminescence.  Nowhere else.  Her caps doomed her to vision.
She could always remove them, of course.  Easy enough to do, hardly different from popping out a pair of contact lenses.  She vaguely remembered the look of her naked eyes; they were pale blue, so pale the irises almost got lost in the whites.  Sort of like looking into sea ice.  She'd been told her eyes were cold, and sexy.
She hadn't taken her caps out for almost a year now.  She'd kept them on in front of people she'd fought against, fought for, fucked over.  She hadn't even taken them off during sex.  She wasn't about to strip now, in front of strangers.
If it was darkness she was after, she'd have to close her eyes.   Surrounded by a million refugees, that wasn't the easiest thing to do either.
She found a few square meters of emptiness.  Refugees huddled under blankets and lean-tos nearby, slept or fucked in darkness that must have afforded some cover to their eyes, at least.   They'd pretty much left her alone, as Amitav had said they would.  In fact, they accorded her considerably more space than they granted each other.  She lay back in her little patch of sand, her territory, and closed her eyes against the brilliant darkness.  A soft rain was falling; the diveskin numbed her body to it, but she could feel it on her face.  It was almost a caress.
She drifted.  She imagined she must have slept at some point, but her eyes happened to be open on two occasions when botflies passed quietly overhead, dark ellipses backlit by a brightness too faint for naked eyes.  Each time she tensed, ready to flee into the ocean, but the drones took no notice of her.
No initiative, she reflected.  They don't see anything they're not programmed to look for.  Or perhaps their senses weren't as finely-tuned as she'd feared.  Perhaps they just couldn't see her implants; maybe her aura was too faint, or too far away.  Maybe botflies didn't see as deeply into the EM spectrum as she'd feared.
I was all alone, that first time, she thought.  The whole beach was closed off.  I bet that's it.  They pay attention to trespassers…
So did Amitav, evidently.  That was shaping up to be a problem.

#

He appeared at the cycler the next morning with a dead botfly in his arms.  It looked a bit like a turtle shell she'd once seen in a museum, except for the vents and instruments studding the ventral surface.  It was split along its equatorial seam; black smudges lined the breach.
"Can you fix this?"  Amitav asked.  "Any of it?"
Clarke shook her head.  "Don't know anything about botflies."  She lifted the carapace anyway.  Inside, burnt electronics nested under a layer of soot.
She ran one thumb along a small pebbled convexity,  felt the compound lenses of a visual cluster beneath the grime.  Some of the tech was vaguely familiar, but…
"No," she said, setting it on the sand.  "Sorry."
Amitav shrugged and sat, cross-legged.  "I did not expect so," he said.  "But one can always hope, and you seem to have such familiarity with machines yourself…"
She smiled faintly, freshly aware of the implants crowding her thorax.
"I expect you will be going to the fence,"  Amitav said after a moment.  "Your people will let you through when they see you are one of them."
She looked to the east.  Off in the distance, the border towers rose from a fog of human bodies and trampled scrub.  She'd heard about the high-voltage lines and the razorwire strung between them.  She'd heard other things, too, about refugees so driven by their own desperation they'd climbed seven or eight meters before the juice and their own cumulative dismemberment had killed them off.   Their lacerated remains were left rotting on the wires, the story went—whether as an act of deterrence or simple neglect was unclear.
Clarke knew it was all just alligator tales.  Nobody over thirteen believed such bullshit, and the people here—for all their numbers—didn't seem motivated enough to hold a garage sale, much less storm the battlements.  What was the word Amitav had used?
Docile.
In a way it was a shame, though.   She'd never actually been to the fences.  It might have been interesting to check them out.
Being dead had all sorts of little drawbacks.
"Surely you have a home to go to.  Surely you do not wish to stay here,"  Amitav prodded.
"No," she said to both questions.
He waited.  She waited with him.
Finally he stood and glanced down at the dead 'botfly.  "I do not know what made this one crash.  Usually they work quite well.  I believe you've already seen one or two pass by, yes?  Your eyes may be empty, but they are not blind."
Clarke held his gaze and said nothing.
He nudged the little wreck with his toe.  "These are not blind either," he said, and walked away.

#

It was a  hole in darkness:  a window to another world.  It was set at the height of a child's eyes, and it looked into a kitchen she'd not seen in twenty years.
Onto a person she hadn't seen in almost that long.
Her father knelt in front of her, folded down from adult height to regard her eye-to-eye.  He had a serious look on his face.  He grasped her wrist with one hand; something dangled in the other.
She waited for the familiar sickness to rise in her throat, but it didn't come.  The vision was a child's; the viewer was an adult, hardened, adapted, accustomed by now to trials that reduced child-abuse from nightmare down to trite cliché.
She tried to look around; her field of view refused to change.  She could not see her mother.
Par for the course.
Her father's mouth moved; no words came out.  The image was utterly silent, a plague of light with no soundtrack.
This is a dream. A boring dream.  Time to wake up.
She opened her eyes.  The dream didn't stop.
There was a different world behind it, though, a high-contrast jigsaw of photoamplified light and shadow.  Someone stood before her on the sand, but the face was eclipsed by this vision from her childhood.  It floated in front of her, an impossible picture-in-picture.  The present glimmered faintly through from behind.
She closed her eyes.  The present vanished.  The past didn't.
Go away.  I'm done with you.  Go away.
Her father still held her wrist—at least, he held the wrist of the fragile creature whose eyes she was using—but she felt nothing.  And now those eyes focused autonomously on the dangling thing in her father's other hand.  Suddenly frightened, she snapped her own eyes back open before she could see what it was; but once again the image followed her into the real world.
Here, before the destitute numberless hordes of the Strip, her father was holding out a gift for Lenie Clarke.  Her first wristwatch.
Please go away…
"No," said a voice, very close by.  "I am not."
Amitav's voice.  Lenie Clarke, transfixed, made a small animal noise.
Her father was explaining the functions of her new toy.  She couldn't hear what he was saying but it didn't matter; he could see him voiceact'ing the little gadget, stepping through its Net Access functions (they'd called it the Net back then, she remembered), pointing out the tiny antennae that linked to the eyephones...
She shook her head.  The image didn't waver.  Her father was pulling her forward, extending her arm, carefully looping the watch around her wrist.
She knew it wasn't really a gift.  It was a down payment.  It was a token offered in exchange, some half-assed gesture that was supposed to make up for the things he'd done to her all those years ago, the things he was going to do right now, the things—
Her father leaned forward and kissed some spot just above the eyes that Lenie Clarke couldn't shut.  He patted the head that Lenie Clarke couldn't feel.  And then, smiling—
He left her alone.
He moved back down the hall, out of the kitchen, leaving her to play.
The vision dissipated.  The Strip rushed in to fill the hole.
Amitav glowered down at her.  "You are mistaken," he said.  "I am not your father."
She scrambled to her feet.  The ground was muddy and saturated, close to the waterline.  Halogen light stretched in broken strips from the station up the beach.  Bundled motionless bodies lay scattered on the upper reaches of that slope.  None were nearby.
      It was a dream.  Another— hallucination.  Nothing real.
"I am wondering what you are doing here," Amitav said quietly.
Amitav's real.  Focus.  Deal with him.  
"You are not the only—person to have washed up afterwards, of course," the refugee remarked.  "They wash up even now.  But you are much less dead than the others."
You should've seen me before.
"And it is odd that you would come to us like this.  All of this was swept clean many days ago.  An earthquake on the bottom of the ocean, yes?  Far out to sea.  And here you are, built for the deep ocean, and now you come ashore and eat as if you have not eaten for days."  His smile was a predatory thing.  "And you do not wish your people to know that you are here.  You will tell me why."
Clarke leaned forward. "Really.  Or you'll do what, exactly?"
"I will walk to the fence and tell them."
"Start walking,"  Clarke said.
Amitav stared at her, his anger almost palpable.
"Go on," she prodded.  "See if you can find a door, or a spare watch.  Maybe they've left little suggestion boxes for you to pass notes into, hmm?"
"You are quite wrong if you think I could not attract the attention of your people."
"I don't think you really want to.  You've got your own secrets."
"I am a refugee.  We cannot afford secrets."
"Really.  Why are you so skinny, Amitav?"
His eyes widened.
"Tapeworm?  Eating disorder?" She stepped forward.  "Cycler food not agree with you?"
"I hate you," he hissed.
"You don't even know me."
"I know you," he spat.  "I know your people.  I know—"
"You don't know shit.  If you did—if you really had such a hard-on for my people as you call them—you'd be bending over backwards to help me."
He stared at her, a flicker of uncertainty on his face.
She kept her voice low.  "Suppose you're right, Amitav.  Suppose I've come all the way up from the deep sea.  The Axial Volcano, even, if you know where that is."
She waited.  "Go on," he said.
"Let's also say, hypothetically, that the quake was no accident.  Someone set off a nuke  and all those shockwaves just sort of daisy-chained their way back to the coast."
"And why would anyone do such a thing?"
"Theirs to know.  Ours to find out."
Amitav was silent.
"With me so far?  Bomb goes off in the deep sea. I come from the deep sea.  What does that make me, Amitav?  Am I the bad guy here?  Did I trip the switch, and if I did, wouldn't I at least have planned a better escape than swimming across three hundred kilometers of fucking mud, without so much as a fucking sandwich, only to crawl up onto your fucking Strip after a fucking week to get stuck listening to your fucking whining?  Does that make any sense at all?
"Or," —the voice leveling now, coming back under control— "did I just get screwed like everyone else, only I managed to get out alive?  That might be enough to inspire a bit of ill-will even in a white N'AmPac Have-it-all bitch like myself, don't you think?"
And somebody, she promised herself, is going to pay.
Amitav said nothing.  He watched her with his sunken eyes, his expression gone blank and unfathomable once more.
Clarke sighed.  "Do you really want to fuck with me, Amitav?  Do you want to fuck with the people who did hit the switch?  They don't exactly have a light touch when it comes to cleaning up their messes.  Right now they think I'm dead.  Do you want to be around me when they find I'm not?"
"And what is it about you," Amitav said at last, "that makes our lives so unimportant?"
She'd thought a lot about that.  It had lead her back to a bright shining moment of discovery she'd had as a child.  She'd been astonished to learn that there was life on the moon:  microscopic life, some kind of bacterium that had hitched a ride with the first unmanned probes.  It had survived years of starvation in hard vacuum, frozen, boiled, pelted by an unending sleet of hard radiation.
Life, she'd learned, could survive anything.  At the time it had been cause for hope.
"I think that maybe there's something inside me," she said now.  "I think—"
Something brushed against her leg.
Her arm lashed out reflexively.   Her fist clenched around the wrist of a young boy.
He'd been going for the gas billy on her calf.
"Ah," Clarke said.  "Of course."
The boy stared back at her, petrified.
She turned back to Amitav; the child whimpered and squirmed in her grip.  "Friend of yours?"
"I, ah—"
"Little diversionary tactic, perhaps?  You don't have the balls to take me on, and none of your grown-up buddies will help out, so you use a fucking child?"  She yanked on the small arm:  the boy yelped.
Sleepers stirred in the distance, used to chronic disturbance.  None seemed to fully awaken.
"Why should you care?" Amitav hissed.  "It is not a weapon, you said so yourself.  Am I a fool, to believe such claims when you come here waving it like an ataghan?  What is it?  A shockprod?"
"I'll show you," she said.
She bent, still gripping the child. A depolarizing blade protruded from the tip of her glove like a gray fingernail; the sheath on her calf split as if scalpeled at its touch.  The billy slid easily into her grip, a blunt ebony rod with a fluorescent band at the base of the handgrip.
Amitav raised his hands, suddenly placating.  "There is no need—"
"Ah, but there is.  Come in close, now."
Amitav took a step back.
"It works on contact," Clarke said.  "Injects compressed gas.  Comes in handy down on the rift, when the wildlife tries to eat you."
She thumbed the safety on the billy, jammed the rod point-down into the sand.
With a crack like the inside of a thunderclap, the beach exploded.

#

The universe rang like a tuning fork.  She lay where the blast had thrown her.  Her face stung as though sandblasted.
Her eyelids were clenched.  It seemed like a very long time before she could open them again.
A crater yawned across three meters of sand, filling with groundwater.
She climbed to her feet.  The Strip had leapt awake in an instant, fled outward, turned back and congealed into a ring of shocked and frightened faces.
Amazingly, she was still holding the billy.
She eyed the device with numb incredulity.  She'd used it more times than she could count.  Whenever one of Channer Vent's monsters had tried to take her apart she'd parried, jammed the billy home, watched as one more predator bloated and burst at her touch.  It had been lethal enough to the fish, but it had never exploded with this kind of force before.  Not down on the…
Oh, shit.  On the Rift.
It had been calibrated to deliver a lethal charge at the bottom of the ocean, where five thousand PSI was a gentle burp.  Down there it had been a reasonably effective weapon.
At sea level, without all those atmospheres pushing back, it was a bomb.
"I didn't mean—I thought…"  Clarke looked around.  An endless line of faces looked back.
Amitav lay sprawled on the opposite side of the crater.  He moaned, brought one hand to his face.
There was no sign of the boy.
STICKMAN
A thunderclap at midnight.  Something exploded near a Calvin Cycler just south of Gray's Harbor.  A botfly had been coming around the headland to the south; it wasn't line-of-sight at detonation but it had ears.  It sent an alert to home base and turboed over to investigate.
Sou-Hon Perreault was on duty.  She'd swapped over to the graveyard shift the day she'd learned that Mermaids came out at night.  (Her husband, having recently learned about the special needs of vPTS victims, had accepted the change without complaint.)  Now she slipped into the botfly's perceptual sphere as though it were a second skin, and took stock.
A shallow crater yawned across the intertidal substrate.  Tracking outwards:  chaotic tangles of heat and bioelectricity,  restless as spooked cattle.  Perreault narrowed the EM to amped visible; the heat lightning resolved into a milling mass of dull gray humanity.
The Strip had its own districts, its own self-generating ghettos within ghettos.  The people here hailed mainly from the Indian subcon:  Perreault set her primary filters to Punjabi, Bengali, and Urdu.  She began asking questions.
An explosion, yes.  Nobody really knew for certain what had led up to it.  There had been raised voices, some said.  Man, woman, child.  Accusations of theft.  And then, suddenly, bang.  
Everyone awake after that, everyone in retreat.  The woman waving some kind of shockprod like a club.  The masses, keeping their distance.  One man in the circle with her, blood on his face.  Angry.  Facing the woman, indifferent to the weapon in her hand.  The child had vanished by now, all agreed.  Nobody knew who the child might have been.
Everyone remembered the adults, though.  Amitav and the mermaid.
"Where did they go?" Perreault said; the botfly translated her words with toneless dispassion.
To the ocean.  The mermaid always goes to the ocean.
"What about the other one?  This Amitav?"
After her.  With her.  To the ocean.
Ten minutes past, perhaps.
Perreault pulled the botfly into a steep climb, panned along the Strip from fifty meters up.  The refugees dissolved into a Brownian horde; waves of motion passed through the crowd far faster than any one person could make way.  There:  barely discernible, a fading line of turbulence connecting the crater to the surf.  Milling particles, recently disrupted by the passage of something aimed.
She swooped down towards the waterline.  Upturned faces everywhere, gray and luminous in the botfly's photoamps, following its course like sunflowers tracking the light.
Except for one, a ways down the beach, running south through ankle-deep foam.  Not looking back.
Perreault widened the filters:  nothing mechanical in the thorax.  Not the mermaid.  There were other anomalies, though.  She was chasing a skeleton, a ludicrous emaciated throwback to the days when malnutrition was a recognized hallmark of refugees everywhere.  
There was no need for starvation here.  There'd been no need for years.  This one had chosen to starve.  This one was political.  
No wonder he was running.
Perreault nudged the botfly into pursuit.  It sped past its quarry in seconds, slewed around, and dropped down to block his escape.  Perreault tripped the floods and pinned the refugee in twin beams of blinding halogen.
"Amitav," she said.

#

She'd heard of them, of course.  They were rare, but not too rare for a label: stickmen, they were called.  Perreault had never actually seen one in the flesh before.
Hindian.  Sunken eyes, pools of sullen shadow.  Blood oozing in a sheen of droplets from his face.  One hand was raised to shield his eyes from the light; more blood rose from a raw stigmatum on the palm.  Limbs, joints, fingers as sharp-edged and angular as origami protruding from his torn clothing.  The soles of his feet had been sprayed with plastic in lieu of shoes.
The ocean hemmed him in on one side; strippers looked on curiously from all others, keeping clear of the halogen pool.  Every segment of the stickman's frame was tensed, poised between equally-futile options of flight and attack
"Relax," Perreault said.  "I only want to ask you some questions."
"Ah.  Questions from a police robot," he said. Thin lips drawn back from brown teeth, the cracks between bloody.  A cynical rictus.  "I am relieved."
She blinked.  "You speak English."
"It is not an uncommon language.  Not as stylish as French these days, though, yes?  What do you want?"
Perreault disabled the translator.  "What happened back there?"
"There is no cause to worry.  None of your machinery was harmed."
"I'm not interested in the machinery.  There was an explosion."
"Your wonderful machines do not provide us with explosives," Amitav pointed out. 
"There was a woman, a diver.  There was a child."
The stickman glowered.
"I just want to know what happened," Perreault told him.  "I'm not looking to give you any trouble."
Amitav spat.  "Of course not.  You blind me to test my eyes, yes?"
Perreault killed the floods.  Black and white faded to gray.
"Thank you," Amitav said after a moment.
"Tell me what happened."
"She said it was an accident," Amitav said.
"An accident?"
"The child was—Clarke had this, I am not sure of the word, this club.  On her leg.  She called it a billy."
"Clarke?"
"Your diver."
Clarke.  "Do you know her first name?"
"No."  Amitav snorted.  "Kali is as good a name as any, though."
"Go on."
"The child, he—he tried to steal it.  While we were—talking."
"You didn't stop him?"
Amitav shifted uncomfortably.  "I believe she was trying to show the child that the billy was dangerous," he said.  "In that she succeeded.  I myself flew.  It left marks."  He smiled, held up his hands once more, palms up.  Flayed flesh, oozing blood.
Amitav fell silent and looked out to sea.  Perreault's  perspective bobbed slightly in a sudden breeze, as though the botfly was nodding.
"I do not know what happened to the child," Amitav said at last.  "By the time I could stand again he was gone.  Clarke was looking for him, though."
"Who is she?"  Perreault asked softly.  "Do you know her?"
He spat. "She would not say so."
"But you've seen her before.  Tonight was not the first time."
"Oh yes.  Your pets here" —looking at the other refugees— "they come to me whenever something requires initiative, yes?   They tell me where the mermaid is, so I can go and deal with her."
"But you two are connected somehow.   You're friends, or—"
"We are not sheep," Amitav said.  "That is all we have in common.  Here, it is enough."
"I want to know about her."
"That is wise," Amitav said, more quietly. 
"Why do you say that?"
"Because she survived what you did to her.  Because she knows you did it."
"I didn't do anything."
The stickman waved one dismissive hand.  "No matter.  She will come for you anyway."
"What happened?  What was done to her?"
"She did not say, exactly.  She says very little.  And sometimes, when she does say things, she does not say them to anyone here, yes?  At least, no one I can see.  But they get her quite upset."
"She sees ghosts?"
Amitav shrugged.  "Ghosts are not uncommon here.  I am speaking to one now."
"You know I'm no ghost."
"Not a real one, perhaps.  You only haunt machinery." 
Sou-Hon Perreault looked for a filter to tweak.  She couldn't find one that fit.
"She said you caused the earthquake," Amitav said suddenly.  "She says you sent the wave that killed so many of us."
"That's ridiculous."
"And you would know, yes?  Your leaders would share such things with the drivers of mechanical insects?"
"Why would anyone do something like that?"
Amitav shrugged.  "Ask Clarke.  If you can find her."
"Can you help me do that?"
"Certainly."  He pointed to the Pacific.  "She is out there."
"Will you see her again?"
"I do not know."
"Can you let me know if you do?"
"And how would I do that even if I wished to?"
"Sou-Hon," Perreault said.
"I do not understand."
"That's my name.  Sou-Hon.  I can program the botflies to recognize your voice.  If they hear you calling me, they'll let me know."
"Ah," Amitav said.
"Well?"  
Amitav smiled. "Don't call us.  We'll call you."
AN INVITATION TO DANCE
In South Bend, the mermaid killed a man.
Willapa Bay ruptured the Strip like an ulcer twelve kilometers across.  Official surveillance of that gap had not been designed to catch people for whom breathing was optional; now the coast was fifteen klicks behind her.  This far in, the Wave had been thwarted by headlands and a thick stubby island, clogging the inlet like a cyst.  The Big One had merely trembled here.  The wreckage and desolation was all of local origin.
She emerged past midnight onto a dark, corroded segment of waterfront, long since abandoned to a creeping blight of premillennial toluene.  Nervous late-night pedestrians glimpsed her on the edge of the city core and increased their pace from A to B.  The last time Clarke had wandered civilized streets there'd been free wristwatch dispensers on every second corner, a half-hearted sop to those who'd have empowered the masses through access to information.  She could find no dispensers in this place, only an old public phone standing guard in fluorescent twilight.  She interrogated it.  She was here, it told her.  Yves Scanlon lived there, three hundred kilometers to the northeast. 
He wouldn't be expecting her.  She faded to black.  Indifferent security cameras reduced her to a transient assemblage of  infrared pixels.
She clambered back down concrete scree to an oily waterline.  Something called to her as she retrieved her fins:  muffled, familiar sounds from an abandoned customs office.  
It could have been the splintering of rotten pilings.    Maybe a boot against ribs, with flesh getting in the way.  Something knotted in Clarke's throat.  There's no end to the things you can slam into a human body.  She'd lost count of the different sounds they made.
Almost too faint to hear, more whimper than words:  "Fuck, man…"  The muted hum of an electrical discharge.  A groan.
A walkway extended around the derelict office; junk piled along its length waited to trip anyone not gifted with night eyes.  At the other side of the building, a dock jutted from the waterfront on wooden pilings.  Two figures stood on that platform, a man and a woman.  Four others lay twitching at their feet.  A police botfly slept on the pier, conveniently offline.
Technically, of course, it was not an assault.  Both aggressors wore uniforms and badges conferring the legal right to beat whoever they chose.  Tonight they'd chosen an entrée of juveniles, laid out along the creosote-stained planks like gutted fish.  Those bodies twitched with the spastic neural static of shockprod discharge; beyond that, they didn't react to the boots in their sides.  Clarke could hear snatches of conversation from the uniforms, talk of curfew violations and unauthorized use of the Maelstrom.
And of trespassing.
"On government property, no less," remarked the male, lifting one arm in a grand gesture that took in the dock, the pilings, the derelict office, Lenie Clarke—
—Shit he's wearing eyecaps they're both wearing eyecaps—
"You!"  The policeman took a single step towards the office, pointing his shockprod at the shadows in which she lay exposed.  "Stand away from the building!"

#

There'd been a time, not so long ago, when Lenie Clarke would have obeyed without thinking.  She'd have followed orders even though she knew what was coming, because she'd learned that you deal with violence by just shutting up and getting it over with.  It would hurt, of course.  That was the whole point.  But it was better than the chronic queasiness, the expectation, the endless interludes between assaults where you could only wait for it to happen.
More recently, she would have simply fled.  Or at least withdrawn.  None of my business, she'd have told herself, and departed before anyone even knew she was there.  She had done that when Mike Brander, denied revenge upon those who'd made his childhood a living hell, had used Gerry Fischer as a convenient proxy.  It had been none of my business when Beebe Station resounded with the sound of Brander's rage and Fischer's breaking bones.  It had been none of my business when Brander, shift after shift, had stood guard in the wet room, daring Fischer to come back inside.  Eventually Fischer had faded from man to child to reptile, an empty inhuman cipher living on the edge of the rift.  Even then, it had been none of Lenie Clarke's business.
But Gerry Fischer was dead now.  So was Lenie Clarke, for that matter.  She'd died with the others:  Alice and Mike and Ken and Gerry, all turned into white-hot vapor.  They were all dead, and when the stone had been rolled away and the voice had rung out, Lazarus!  Come forth! it hadn't been any of Lenie Clarke's friends that had risen from the grave.  It hadn't even been Lenie Clarke.  Not the soft squirming career victim of her dryback days, anyway.  Not the opaque chrysalis gestating down on the rift.  It had been something newly-forged, acid-washed, some white-hot metamorph of Lenie Clarke that had never existed before.
Now it was confronted by a familiar icon—an authority, a giver of orders, an eager practitioner of the legal right to commit violence upon her.  She did not regard its challenge as an order to be obeyed.  She did not consider it a situation to be avoided.
For Lenie Clarke Mark II, it was a long-overdue invitation to dance.
PIXELPAL
BCC5932 TRIGGER STIMULUS / THROUGHPUT INTERCEPT
Obj. Class:  file packet / benign
Obj. Species: pers. comm. (NI) / packet 7 of 23 / voice modem decrypt
Obj. Source: corrupted
Obj. Destination: multi (ref. cc)
EXCISE CRITERION:  255-CHR BRACKET INI/FIN TRIGGERING STIMULI. 
EXCERPT BEGINS 

that likely to get away with it forever.  A little too metallic if you know what I mean.  Anyway, they haven't caught us at it yet.
We did get caught a few days back, though, over something else again. Except we lucked into this avenging angel.  No shit.  Lenie Clarke, her name was.  It was our own stupid fault, I guess.  Didn't check for leakage when we logged on.  Anyhow, les beus came down on us, they got everyone except Haj1 and me, and what could we do except run for it?  And they had everybody down and all of a sudden there's this K-selector walking out of nowhere, looks like one of those old litcrits with the teeth, you know, vampires.  All in black and she's wearing the absolute thickest ConTacs you ever saw, even thicker than les beus.  Barely see her eyes behind them.  Anyhow, she just walks out of the shadows and right into them. 
You wouldn’t think she’d last two seconds.  I mean, she didn’t even notice the shockprods, I don’t think that suit of hers carries a charge, but still.  She just wasn’t that big, you know?  And they were really wailing on her, and she just took it.  Like it was the most natural thing in the world.  Or like—you know—almost like she got off on it, or something.
Anyway, she wraps her arms around this big beefy antibody and she just pushes, and they go right over the edge, and the sterilites go on when they hit the water—kind of wild those things still work, pier hasn’t seen any boat traffic in years—and the water lights up all cool and radium-glow and there’s some splashing and then there's this big whoomf and it's like this huge bubble of blood and guts just sort of boils up to the surface and the water's like completely gone to rust.
 She's like some kinda amphibian, one of those rifter cyborgs.  We met up with her after, she came back to pick up her fins when things had cooled down.  Don't ask me what she was doing here in the middle of the night.  Didn't talk much and we didn't push.  We set her up with some snacks and supplies—she'd been eating from cyclers on the Strip, if you can believe it.  Although it didn't seem to've dulled her edge any.  Gave her my watch.  She hadn't even heard about the curfew.  I had to show her how to get around the timelock.  Guess you lose touch with things when you spend all your time on the bottom of the ocean.  Not that it held her back any.  You should’ve seen that asshole.  They fished him out of the water like an old rag.  I would've paid to see his face, you know? 
I tried to look her up but Lenie Clarke isn't exactly sockeye on the registry.  Got more hits than holocausts.  She did mention her home town, I think, but I couldn't find that either.  Any of you guys ever hear of a place called Beebe?
Anyhow, far as I know she's still at large.  Les beus are probably looking for her, but I bet fifty QueBucks they don't even know what she looks like under all that gear, never mind who she is.   I mean, they hardly ever catch us, and they know everything there is to know about us.  Well, not everything.  Right, m

EXCERPT ENDS

CALL ehemoth
Lenie Clarke/Beebe CONFIRMED.
ADD SEARCH TERMS: amphibian/s, rifter/s,  cyborg/s  
OVERLAY TEMPLATE.  RESEQUENCE TEXT. 
COPY.  TRANSLOCATE.
SPREAD THE WORD.

THIRD-PERSON LIMITED
Perreault hadn't needed Amitav's permission, of course.  She'd programmed the botflies to recognize him anyway.  She'd dropped a cloud of mosquitoes too, little flying sensors no bigger than rice grains.  They were braindead, but they could afford to be; they relayed raw telemetry back to the 'flies for all the real analysis.  That increased coverage by an order of magnitude, at least until their batteries gave out. 
It would still be a crap-shoot: a botfly or skeet would have to be line-of-sight with Amitav once she'd put out the call, and there'd have to be enough of him visible to make an ID—very iffy, given the human congestion on the Strip.  It would be easy enough for the stickman to hide, should he choose to.
Still.  Long odds were better than none.
She finished a late supper across the table from her husband, noted his forlorn hopeless scrutiny almost in passing.  Marty was doing his utmost, she knew—giving space, giving support.   Waiting for that predictable moment when the shock wore off, her defenses fell, and she needed help picking up the pieces.  Every now and then Perreault would search herself for signs of that imminent breakdown.  Nothing.   The antidepressants were still having some effect, of course, even after her system had shocked itself into partial immunity; but that shouldn't have been enough.  She should be feeling something by now.
She was.  Intense, passionate, all-consuming.  Curiosity.
She squeezed Martin's hand across the table and headed towards her office.  It was almost a half-hour until her shift began, but nobody on the circuit minded if she started early.  She slid into her seat—a favored antique with flared arms and a skin of real leather—and was reaching for her headset when her husband's hand fell lightly onto her shoulder.
"Why does she matter so much?" he asked.  It was the first time he'd come into her office since the breakdown.
"Marty, I've got to go to work."
He waited.
She sighed and swiveled her chair to face him.  "I don't know.  It's—it's a mystery, I guess.  Something to solve."
"It's more than that."
"Why?  Why does it have to be?"  She heard the exasperation in her own voice, saw its effect on her husband.  She took a breath and tried again.  "I don't know.  It's just—you wouldn't think a single person could count for much, but—she's making an impression, you know?  At least on the Strip.  She matters, somehow …"
Martin shook his head.  "Is that what she is to you?  A role model?"
"I didn't say—"
"She could be something else, Sou.  What if she's a fugitive?"
"What?"
"It must have crossed your mind.  Someone from N'Am—or I don't know, not your standard refugee, anyway.  Why's she staying out on the Strip?  Why doesn't she want to go home?  What's she hiding from?"
"I don't know.  That's what makes it a mystery."
"She could be dangerous."
"What, to me?  She's way out on the coast!  She doesn't even know I exist!"
"Still.  You should report it."
"Maybe."  Perreault swiveled deliberately back to her desk.  "I really have to work now, Martin."
He wouldn't have let her off so easily before, of course.  But he knew his assigned role, he'd been coached by a half-dozen well-meaning authorities.  Your wife has just come through a very traumatic experience.  She's fragile.  Let her move at her own pace.  
Don't push.
So he didn't.  A little piece of Sou-Hon felt guilty for taking advantage of that restraint.  The rest was reveling in the cradling embrace of the headset around her skull, the sudden pinpoint control over what was and wasn't perceived, the—
"Semen-sucking savior," she whispered.
The alert was flashing all over the left side of her visual field.  One of the botflies had got a nibble.  More than a nibble; a big predatory bite.  Right now, it was hovering less than three meters off-target.
Not Amitav either, this time.  A marriage of flesh and machinery.  One woman, with clockwork.

#
 
Deep night, beneath an endless cloudbank.  Across the black water, floodlights and heaters smudged distant light along the Strip.  Perreault triggered the photoamps.  
The mermaid crouched directly ahead on a jagged reef, a hundred-fifty meters from shore.  The ocean, sparkling with microbial phosphorescence, tried to dislodge her.  Between waves the reef jutted a meter above the waterline, myriad tiny waterfalls draining down its sides; when the water crested the mermaid became a round black boulder herself, barely visible in the luminous foam.
She climbed to her feet.  The surge rose above her knees; she staggered, but stayed upright.  Her face was a pale oval painted onto a black body.  Her eyes were paler ovals painted onto her face.  They panned past the hovering botfly.
They did not seem to notice it. 
Her face tilted down, stared directly ahead.  One slick ebony arm reached forward, the fingers extended; a blind woman, reaching for something she could not see.  Clarke's mouth moved.  Any words were lost in the roar of the surf.  Perreault slid filters past critical thresholds.  Ocean sounds squelched into silence.  Now only the shriek of distant gulls and a few syllables:
	"No.  Not—ain."
Perreault squelched the high frequencies as well.  Now the mermaid stood in an utterly silent tableau, the Pacific crashing soundlessly on all sides.  
"You never did," she said.  Tide surged silently between her legs. The mermaid's reaching fingers closed around empty space.  She seemed surprised.
Another wave swept the reef.  The mermaid staggered, recovered.  Perreault noticed that both of her hands were balled into fists.
"Dad."  Almost a whisper.
"Ms. Clarke," Perreault said.  The mermaid did not respond.  
Right.  The surf.  Perreault increased the volume, tried again:  "Ms. Clarke."
The mermaid's head jerked up.  "You!  What is it?"
"Ms. Clarke, I've been—"
"Something in the food?  Some sort of psychoactive?  Is that what this is?"
"Ms. Clarke, I don't know what—"
The mermaid smiled, a hideous baring of teeth beneath cold white eyespots.  "Fine.  I can take it.  Do your worst."  
"Ms. Clarke—"
"This is fucking nothing.  You just wait."
The Pacific surged silently up from behind her, swept her from the reef in the blink of an eye.  The cameras caught a last freeze-framed moment:  A fist, raised briefly above the boiling water.  Gone.
This is fucking nothing.  You just wait.
Sou-Hon Perreault didn't know that she could.
REMORA
The lock groaned open like the gates of an iron cathedral.  Earthquakes lived in that sound, twisting metal, skyscrapers torqued painfully on their axes.   Slow surge pushed flotsam from great doors that stirred the ocean.
Rising within that sound, another one:  triple screws, cavitating.
She'd placed herself  a few hundred meters offshore, in the center of a dredged scar leading to deep water.  Gray's Harbor's commercial traffic passed directly overhead.   By now she'd had enough practice to make it work.  She  rose a few meters off the bottom; the drag from the new backpack slowed her a bit, but she was getting used to it.  Echosounding pulses from the approaching vessel tapped against her implants.  The murky water went suddenly, ominously  dark—first to her right, then directly overhead.   The water pushed her backwards.  An instant later a black wall, studded with rivets, rushed obliquely out of the murk and streamed past, filling the ocean.  The hiss of approaching screws filled the water.
She'd counted herself lucky, so far, that none of the ships had smashed into her.  She knew those odds were low—bow waves pushed water and flotsam aside—but such reassuring insights always occurred during quiet moments on the bottom.  Now, a cliff of motion-blurred metal within touching distance, she could only think of fly-swatters.
She broke the surface; the cliff shimmered into sudden sharp focus, black and rusty-red, a great concave overhang eclipsing three-quarters of the sky.  An ice-wrangler.  She turned to face the approaching stern.  Racing towards her, edge-on, a metal fin angled down and out from the hull just above the waterline.  Foam boiled where its distal end cut the water.
A trim tab.  It could give her a free ride, or take off her head.  If she floated along the surface—just past the point where the metal slashed the sea—the tip of the fin would pass beneath her.  There'd be a split-second to grab at the leading edge.
Maybe ten seconds to get into position.  
She almost made it.
Her right hand hooked the fin; the left slid off, confounded by turbulence.  In an instant the tab was past, taking Clarke's hand with it.  Everything went bowstring-taut in an instant.  Her right shoulder popped from its socket.  Clarke tried to scream.  Her flooded amphibian body drowned the sound at conception. 
She drew her left arm forward.  Drag slapped it back.  She tried again.  The muscles of her right shoulder screamed in outrage.  Her left hand crept upstream along the surface of the tab; finally its fingers found the leading edge, hooked reflexively.
Her shoulder popped back into place.  Those muscles, never satisfied, screamed all over again.
A cascade of water and foam tried to push her off.  The wrangler was moving dead slow and she was barely hanging on.  They'd be opening the throttle the moment they past the last channel-marker.
She edged laterally up the slope.  Seawater thinned to spray; then she was clear, lying against the main hull.  She split her face seal; her lung reinflated with a tired sigh.
The tab angled down at about twenty degrees.  Clarke propped her back against the hull and brought her knees up, planting her feet downslope.  She was wedged securely a good two meters from the water; the soles of her fins provided more than enough traction to keep her from slipping.
The outermost channel spar slid past.  The vessel began picking up speed.  Clarke kept one eye on the shore, the other on her nav panel.  It didn't take long for the readings to change.
At last.  This one was turning north.  She relaxed.
The Strip scrolled slowly past in the distance, backed by the vertebral spikes of its eastern towers.  At this range she could barely make out movement on shore; diffuse patches in vague motion, at best.  Clouds of flightless gnats.
She thought of Amitav, the anorexic.  The only one with the balls to come right out and openly hate her.
She wished him well.
FIREBUG
Achilles Desjardins had always found smart gels a bit creepy.  People thought of them as brains in boxes, but they weren't.  They didn't have the parts.  Forget about the neocortex or the cerebellum—these things had nothing.  No hypothalamus, no pineal gland, no sheathing of mammal over reptile over fish.  No instincts.  No desires.  Just a porridge of cultured neurons, really:  four-digit IQs that didn't give a rat's ass whether they even lived or died.  Somehow they learned through operant conditioning, although they lacked the capacity to either enjoy reward or suffer punishment.  Their pathways formed and dissolved with all the colorless indifference of water shaping a river delta.
But Desjardins had to admit they had their uses.  Wildlife didn't stand a chance going up against a head cheese.
Not that wildlife hadn't tried, of course.  But the Maelstrom ecosystems had evolved in a world of silicon and arsenide—a few hundred basic operating systems, endlessly repeated.  Predictable registers and addresses.  Stuff you could count on; not some slab of thinking meat in constant flux.  Even if some shark did manage to scope out some architecture it would be no further ahead.  Gels rewired themselves with each passing thought; what good is a map when the topography won't stop moving?
That was the theory, anyway.  The proof was an eye of calm, staring out from the heart of Maelstrom itself.  Since the day of its birth the gels had kept it clean, a high-speed computational landscape unpolluted by worms or viruses or digital predators.  One day, a long time ago, the whole network had been this clean.  Perhaps one day it would be again, if the gels lived up to their potential.  For the time being, though, only a select two or three million souls were allowed inside.  
It was called Haven, and Achilles Desjardins practically lived there. 
Now he was spinning a web across one pristine corner of his playground.  Rowan's  biochemical stats had already been sent to Jovellanos's station: the first thing he did was establish an update link.  Then he looked over the ramparts, peeking past the shoulders of the vigilant gels into Maelstrom proper.  There were things out there that had to be brought inside—carefully, though, mindful of the sparkling floors:
Tap into EOS archives.  Get daily radar maps of soil moisture for the past year, if available.  (A big if, these days.  Desjardins had tried to load a copy of Bonny Anne from the library the week before, only to find they'd started wiping all books that hadn't been accessed for more than a two-month period.   The same old mantra:  storage limitations.)   EM snaps of polyelectrolytes and complexing cations.   Multispectrals on all major chlorophylls, xanthophylls, carotenoids:  iron and soil nitrogen, too.  And just to be thorough—without much hope, mind you—query the NCBI database for recent constructs with real-world viability.
Competing with conventional primary producers, Rowan had said.  Meaning the conventional bugs might be dying off:  do a spectral for elevated soil methane.  Distribution potentially temperature-limited; infrared, crossed with albedo and windspeed.  Restrict all searches to a polygon extending from the spine of the Cascades out to the coast, and from Cape Flattery down to the thirty-eighth parallel.
Draw the threads together.  Squeeze the signal through the usual statistical gauntlet:  path analysis, Boltzmann transforms, half-a-dozen breeds of nonlinear estimation.  Discriminant functions.  Hankins filters.  Principal component analysis.  Interferometry profiles across a range of wavelengths.  Lynn-Hardy hyperniche tables.  Repeat all analyses with intervariable time-lags in sequence from zero days to thirty.
Desjardins played at his panel.  Abstract shapes condensed from diffuse clouds of data, winked provocatively at the corner of his eye, vanished the moment he focused on them.  Fuzzy white lines from a dozen directions interwove, colored, took on intricate fractal patterns—
But no.  This mosaic had a P value greater than 0.25; that one violated assumptions of homoscedasticity.  The little one in the corner drove the Hessians fucking crazy.  One flawed thread, barely visible, and the whole carpet unraveled.  Tear it down, bleach out the transforms, start from scratch—
Wait a minute.
Correlation coefficient of -0.873.  What was that all about?
Temperature.  Temperature went up when chlorophyll went down.
Why the hell didn't I see that before?  Oh, there. A time-lag.  What the…
What the…
A soft chime in his ear:  "Hey Killjoy.  I've got something really strange here."
"Me too," Desjardins replied.

#


Jovellanos's office was just down the hall; it still took her a few minutes to show up at his door.  The caffeine spike clenched in her hand told him why.
"You should get more sleep," he remarked.  "You won't need so many chemicals."
She raised an eyebrow.  "This from the man with half his bloodstream registered in the patent office."  Jovellanos hadn't had her shots yet.  She didn't need them in her current position, but she was too good at her job to stay where she was much longer.  Desjardins looked forward to the day when her righteous stance on the Sanctity of Free Will went head-to-head against the legal prerequisites for promotion.  She'd probably take one look at the list of perks and the new salary, and cave.
He had, anyway.
He spun his chair back to the console and brought the correlation matrix up on the display.  "Look at this.  Chloroes go down, soil temperature goes up."
"Huge P-value," Jovellanos said.  
"Small sample size.  That's not the point:  look at the time-lag."
She leaned forward.  "Those are awfully big confidence limits."
"The lag's not consistent.  Sometimes it takes a couple of days for the temp to rise, sometimes a few weeks."
"That's barely even a pattern, Killjoy.  Anything--"
"Take a guess at the magnitude," he broke in. 
"Loss of plant cover, right?"  Jovellanos shrugged.  "Assuming it is a real effect, say half a degree?  Quarter?"
Desjardins showed her.
"Holy shit," she said.  "This bug starts fires?"
"Something does, anyway.  I scanned the municipal archives along the coast:  all local firestorms, mostly attributed to acts of terrorism or 'industrial accidents'.  Also a couple of tree farms going down for some agro pest—budworm or something."
Jovellanos was at his elbow, her hands running over his console.  "What about other fires in the area…"
"Oh, lots.  Even keeping strictly within the search window, I found a good eight or nine that didn't correlate.  A ties to B, but not vice versa."
"So maybe it's a fluke," she said hopefully.  "Maybe it doesn't mean anything."
"Or maybe somebody else has a better track on this bug than we do."
Jovellanos didn't answer for a moment.  Then:  "Well, we might be able to improve our own track a bit." 
Desjardins glanced up. "Yeah?"
"I've been working up that sample they gave us.  They're not making it easy, they haven't left a single intact organelle as far as I can tell—"
He waved her on:  "It all looks the same to a mass spec."
"Only if they left all the pieces behind after they mashed them."
"Of course they did.  Otherwise you'd never get an accurate sig."
"Well, I can't find half the stuff that's supposed to be there.  No phospholipids, even.  Lots of nucleotides, but I can't get them to fit a DNA template.  So your bug's probably RNA-based."
"Uh huh."  No surprises there—lots of microbes got along just fine without DNA.
"Also I've managed to reconstruct some simple enzymes, but they're a bit too stiff in the joints to work properly, you know?  Oh, and this is kind of weird:  I've found a couple of D-aminos."
"Ah."  Desjardins nodded sagely.  "That means what, exactly?"
"Right-handed.  The asymmetric carbons stick off the wrong side of the molecule.  Like your usual left-handed amino, only flipped."
A mirror image.  "So?"
"So that makes 'em useless; all metabolic pathways have been geared for L-aminos and only L-aminos, for the past three billion years at least.  There's a couple of bacteria that use R-aminos because they're useless—they stick them onto their cell walls to make 'em indigestible—but that's not what we're dealing with here."
Desjardins pushed back in his chair.  "So someone built this thing completely from scratch, is that what you're saying?  We've got another new bug on our hands."
"Or an extremely old one," Jovellanos said.  She shook her head, disgusted.  "And that corpse didn't even tell you."
"Maybe she doesn't know."
Jovellanos pointed at the GIS overlay.  Two dozen crimson pinpoints sparkled along the coast from Hongcouver to Newport.  Two dozen tiny anomalies of soil and water chemistry.  Two dozen visitations from an unknown microbe, each presaging a small fiery apocalypse. 
"Somebody knows," Jovellanos said.
AFTERBURN
On all sides Hongcouver licked its wounds.
The city had always been a coward, hiding behind Vancouver Island and a maze of local bathymetry.  That had spared it from the worst effects of the tsunami.  The quake itself had been another story, of course.
In an earlier day, before Maelstrom and telecommuting and city centers half-abandoned, the death toll in the core would have been three times as high.  As it was, those who'd been spared vivisection downtown had merely died closer to home. Whole subdivisions, built on the effluvial sediment of the Fraser Delta, had shuddered into sudden quicksand and disappeared.  Richmond and White Rock and Chilliwack didn't exist any more.  Mount Ranier had awakened overnight in a bad mood;  fresh lava continued to flow over most of its southern face.  Mount Adams was stirring and might yet blow.
In the Hongcouver core, damage was more heterogeneous.  Streets stretched for blocks without so much as a broken window.  Then, across some arbitrary intersection, the world became a place of shattered buildings and upended asphalt.  Bright yellow barriers, erected after the fact, drew boundaries around the injured areas.  Lifters hung above the dark zones like white blood cells on a tumor.  Fresh girders and paneling descended from on high, reconstructive grafts of metropolitan skin and bone.   Heavy machinery grumbled in the canyons where they touched down.
In between, patches of cityscape hummed at half-power, emergency Ballard stacks jumpered into convenient substations.  Those streets that hadn't upended, those buildings that hadn't been shrugged into False Creek, had been swept clean and reactivated.  Field crematoria belched ash from the corner of Georgia and Denman, keeping—so far—one step ahead of the cholera bug.  More barriers than buildings, these days.  Not that there was anywhere else to go; MEMA had sealed the border at Hell's Gate.
Benrai Dutton had survived it all.
He'd been lucky; his splitfit condo was halfway up Point Gray, an island of granite in a sea of sand.  While neighborhoods on all sides had vanished, the Point had merely slipped a little.
Even here there was damage, of course.  Most of the houses on the lower face had collapsed; the few still standing listed drunkenly to the east.  No lights shone from them or the lamp-posts lining the street, even though night was falling.  A jerry-rigged line of portable floods shone from poles that separated wrecked homes from standing ones, but they had a defensive air about them.  They existed, not to bring light to the ruins, but as a perimeter against them.
They existed to blind Benrai Dutton when a crazy woman leapt at his throat from the shadows.
Suddenly he was transfixed:  cold bright eyes without pupils, glaciers embedded in flesh.  A disembodied face, almost as pale as the eyes it contained.  Invisible hands, one around his neck, one at his chest—
—no not invisible she's in black she's all in black—
"What happened?"
"What—what—"
"I am not going to give up!" She hissed, slamming him against a chain link fence.  Her breath swirled between them like backlit fog.  "He took his shots, he took a thousand fucking shots, and I am not going to let him just walk away!"
"Who—what are you—"
She stopped, suddenly.  She cocked her head as though seeing him for the first time.
"Where the fuck did you come from?" she said, absurdly.
She was a good fifteen centimeters shorter than he was.  For some reason it did not occur to him to fight back.
"I don't, I—I was just going home…" Dutton managed.
"That place," the woman said.  Her eyes—nightshades of some kind?--drilled his own.
"What place?"
She slammed him back against the chain link.  "That place!"—jerking her chin at something over his left shoulder.  Dutton turned his head; another splitfit, intact but empty and dark all the same. 
"That place?  I don't—"
"Yes, that place!  Yves Scanlon's fucking place.  You know him?"
"No, I—I  mean, I don't really know anyone here, we kind of keep to—"
"Where did he go?" she hissed.
"Go?" he said weakly.
"The place is absolutely empty!  No furniture, no clothing, not so much as fucking light bulb!"
"Maybe—maybe he left—the quake—"
She knotted her fists more tightly into his clothing, leaned in until they were almost kissing.  "His place doesn't have a fucking scratch on it.  Why would he leave?  How could he?  He's nobody, he's a fucking pissant, you think he could just pick up and walk past the quarantine?"  
Dutton shook his head frantically.  "I don't know—really, I don't—"
She stared into him for a few moments.  Her hair was wet; it hadn't rained all day.  "I don't—I don't know you…" she murmured, almost to herself.  Slowly her fists unclenched. Dutton sagged back against the fence.  
She stepped back, giving him room to move.
It was what he'd been waiting for.  One hand swept briefly beneath his jacket.   The taser jabbed her in the ribcage, just below a strange metallic disk sown into her uniform.  It should have dropped her in an instant.
Within that instant: 
She blinked—
Her right knee came up, hard.  Naturally he wore a cup.  It hurt like hell anyway—
Her right hand slipped forward, against her upraised calf.  Something sprang into it—
The crazy woman stepped back, arm extended.  Two centimeters from his face, an ebony wand with a tiny spike at its tip stared at Dutton like a one-toothed mamba.
Over the pain in his crotch, sudden wet warmth. 
She smiled a small, terrifying smile.  "Use a microwave, little man?"
"Wh—what—?"
"Kitchen appliances? Sensorium?  Keep your house warm in winter?"
He bobbed his head.  "Yes.  Yes, of course I—"
"Huh."  The mamba wiggled over his left eye.  "Then I was wrong.  I know you after all."
"No," he stammered.  "We've never—"
"I know you," she repeated.  "And you owe me."
Her thumb moved against something on the wand's handgrip.  Dutton heard a small click.
"Please…" he prayed.
And amazingly, something answered him.

#

Hongcouver was still a disaster zone, of course; the police had more pressing concerns than an unlikely apparition reported by some panicky dickwad.  Still, the server took Dutton's report when he called it in.  The server wasn't human, but it was smart enough to ask follow-up questions—like, had he noticed anything, anything at all, that might have caused his assailant to suddenly break off the assault?  
No.
Could he think of any reason why she would be suddenly start babbling about dad like that?  Did the reference to monsters make any sense, in context?
Maybe she was just crazy, Dutton replied, although as the server noted he was not qualified to make medical diagnoses.
Had he seen where she had gone, exactly?
Just downhill.  Into the wreckage, towards the water.
And he sure as shit hadn't been going to follow her down there.

STOCKPILE
Vancity CU/N'AmPac Transaction Server
Personal Accounts, Broadway ATM-45, 50/10/05/0551
Transaction Begins:

Welcome to VanCity.  Are you a member?

"I couldn't link, before.  Using my watch."

Remote access curfew is in effect until 10:00am.  At present this terminal can only process on-site transactions.  We apologise for any inconvenience.  Are you a member?

"Lenie Clarke."

Welcome, Ms. Clarke.  Please remove your corneal overlays.

"What?"

We cannot open your account without eyeprint confirmation.  Please remove your corneal overlays.

Thank you.  Scanning.

Complete.  Thank you, Ms. Clarke.  You may proceed.

"What's my total balance?"

$Q42,329.15

"I want to download it all." 

Has Vancity's service been satisfactory?

"It's been fine."

We can see your wristwatch, and a subcutaneous money-chip in your left thigh.  How would you like the funds distributed?

"Forty thousand sub-q, the rest to the watch. Automatic transfer of all funds sub-q if I'm attacked."

That condition can't be evaluated.  Your watch is not equipped with a biotelemetry plug-in.

"Automatic transfer on voice-linked password, then."

What password?

"Sh—shadow…"

Please repeat the password.
Please repeat the password.
Please—

"I said, shadow."

Done.  Would you like another transaction?
(inaudible)
Vancity thanks you for your business.

Transaction ends

#

Sears Medbooth 199/Granville Island/Hongcouver
Transaction record, vocal, 50/10/05/0923
(Test results filed separately.)
Session begins:

Welcome to Sears Medical Services.  Please open your account.
Thank you.  Do you wish to limit your charges?

"No."

What can we do for you today?

"My right shoulder.  Sprained or broken or something.  And a blood scan.  Paths especially."

Please provide blood sample.
Thank you.  Please provide your medical history or your WestHemID#.

"Forget it."

Access to your medical records will help us provide better service.  All information will be kept strictly confidential except in the event of a public health or marketing event.

"I bet.  No thanks."

Your shoulder has been recently dislocated, but is presently reseated.  You will continue to experience pain and stiffness for approximately two months without treatment.  You will experience reduced mobility for at least a year without treatment.  Would you like treatment for the pain?

"Yeah."

We're sorry, but recent heavy user demand has depleted our stock of painkillers.  Anabolic accelerants can reduce the healing period to three to five days.  Shall I administer anabolic accelerants?

"Sure."

We're sorry, but recent heavy user demand has depleted our stock of accelerants. Your blood shows minor deficiencies in calcium and trace-sulfur.  You have elevated levels of the hormones serotonin, oxytocin, and cortisol;  elevated platelet and antibody counts consistent with moderate physical injury within the past three weeks.  None of these findings should cause you serious concern, although the mineral deficiencies may reflect poor dietary habits.  Would you like dietary mineral supplements?

"You actually have any?"

Sears medbooths are regularly maintained and resupplied to ensure that you have reliable access to the best in quality medical care.  Would you like dietary supplements?

"No."

Cellular metabolites are high.  Your blood lactate is low.  Blood gases and amine count—

"What about diseases?"

All pathogen counts are within documented safe ranges.

"You sure?"

The standard blood panel tests for over eight hundred known pathogens and parasites.  More extensive analysis is available for a small additional charge, but the analysis would take up to six hours.  Would you like—

"No, I—but that can't be it, I mean—is that it?"

Is there some specific symptom that concerns you?

"Aren't there some kinds of infections that cause hallucinations?"

Can you describe these hallucinations?

"Visions only.  No sound or smell or anything.  I've been having them for a few weeks now, on and off.  Once every few days, maybe.  They go away by themselves, after a minute or two."

And can you describe what you see in these visions?

"Who cares?  It's just bad biochemistry, right?  Can't you do a brain scan or something?"

The NMR helmet in this booth is presently out of service, and there are no detectable psychoactives in your blood.  However, different conditions can give rise to different types of hallucinations, so I may still be able to offer a diagnosis.  Can you describe what you see in your visions?

"A monster."

Could you be more specific?

"This is bullshit.  You think I don't know you charge by the second?"

Our rates are strictly

"Tell me what's wrong with me or I disconnect."

I don't have enough information for a proper diagnosis.

"Speculate."

Neurological damage is a strong possibility.  Strokes—even very small ones that you may not be consciously aware of—can sometimes trigger visual-release hallucinations.

"Strokes?  Ruptured blood vessels, that kind of thing?"

Yes.  Have you recently undergone a rapid change in ambient pressure?  For example, have you  spent some time at high altitude or in an orbital environment, or perhaps returned from an underwater excursion?

Client disconnect 50/10/05/0932
Session ends.
ICARUS
      There were people who would have described Achilles Desjardins as a murderer a million times over.  
      He had to admit there was a certain truth to that.  Every quarantine he invoked trapped the living alongside the dying, ensured that at least some of those still alive soon wouldn't be.  But what was the alternative, after all?  Let every catastrophe run free, to engulf the world unchecked?  
Desjardins could handle the ethics, with a little help from his chemical sidekicks. He knew in his heart of hearts that that he'd never really killed anyone.  He'd just—contained them, to save others.  The actual killing had been done by whatever pestilence he'd been fighting.  It may have been a subtle distinction, but it was a real one.
There were rumors, though.  There'd always been rumors: the next logical step.  The unconfirmed tales of deaths caused, not in the wake of some disaster, but in advance of it.
      Preemptive containment, it was called.  Path scans would pinpoint some burb—superficially healthy, but we all know how much stock you can put in that— as Contagion Central for The Next Big Bug.   Monte Carlo sims would show with ninety-nine percent confidence that the impending threat would get around conventional quarantines, or prove immune to the usual antibiotics.  LD90s would estimate the mortality rate at 50%, or 80%, or whatever was deemed unacceptable that week, over an area of so many thousand hectares.  So another one of those pesky wildfires would spring up in the parched N'American heartland— and Dicksville, Arkansas would tragically drop off the map.
      Just rumors, of course.  Nobody confirmed it or denied it.  Nobody even really talked about it, except for Alice when she went on one of her rants.  On those occasions, Desjardins would reflect that even if the stories were true—and even if such measures were a bit further down the slippery slope than he was comfortable with—well, anyway, what was the alternative?  Let every catastrophe run free, to engulf the world unchecked?  
      Mostly, though, he didn't think about it.  Certainly it didn't have anything to do with him.
      But now, certain items in his own in-box were starting to look really ugly.  A picture was forming, a mosaic assembling itself from clouds of data, news threads drifting through Maelstrom, bits of third-generation hearsay.  They all came together to form a picture in his mind, and it was starting to look like a seascape.
ehemoth was correlated with subtle blights of photosynthetic pigment.  Those blights, in turn, generally correlated with intense fires.   Seventy-two percent of the blazes had occurred at seaports, in shipyards, or on marine construction sites.  The rest had taken out bits and pieces of residential areas.
People had died.  Lots of people.  And when, on a whim, Desjardins had cross-referenced the residential obits by profession, it turned out that almost all of the fires had killed at least one marine engineer, or commercial diver, or sailor.
This fucker hadn't escaped from anybody's lab.  ehemoth had come from the ocean.
The California Current nosed down along N'AmPac's coast from the Gulf of Alaska.  It mixed it up with the North Pacific and North Equatorial currents way off to the east of Mexico; those, in turn, bled into the Kuroshio off Japan, and the Eastern Counter and Southern Equatorial Currents in the South Pacific.  Which ended up nuzzling the West Wind Drift, and the ankle bone's connected to the leg bone, the leg bone's connected to the knee bone and before you know it the whole fucking planet is encircled.
He studied the data cloud and rubbed his eyes.  How do you contain something that moves across seventy percent of the whole planet?
Evidently, you burned it.
He tapped his console. "Hey Alice."
Her image flashed onto a window, upper-left.  "Right here."
"Give me something."
"Can't yet," she said.  "Not carved in stone."
"Balsa will do.  Anything."
"It's small. Maybe two hundred, three hundred nanometers.  Relies heavily on sulfur compounds, structurally at least.  Very stripped-down genotype; I think it may use RNA for both catalysis and replication, which is a really neat trick.  Built for a simple ecosystem, which makes sense if it's a construct.  They never expected it to get out of culture."
"But what does it do?"
"Can't say.  I'm working with a frog in a blender here, Killjoy.  You should actually be kind of impressed that I've got as far as I have.  You ask me, it's pretty obvious we're not supposed to figure out what it does."
"Could it be some kind of really nasty pathogen?"  It has to be.  It has to be.  If we're burning people,—
"No."  Her voice was flat and emphatic.  "We are not.  They are."
Desjardins blinked.  I said that?  "We're all on the same side, Alice."
"Uh huh."
"Alice…"  Sometimes she really pissed him off.  There's a war going on, he wanted to shout.  And it's not against corpses or bureaucrats or your imaginary Evil Empires, we're fighting against a whole indifferent universe that's coming down around our ears and you're shitting on me because sometimes we have to accept casualties?  
But Alice Jovellanos had a blind spot the size of Antarctica.  Sometimes you just couldn't reason with her.  "Just answer the question, okay?  Someone obviously thinks this thing is extremely dangerous.  Could it be some kind of disease?"
"Biowar agent, you mean."  Surprisingly, though, she shook her head.  "Unlikely."
"How come?"
"Diseases are just little predators that eat you from the inside.  If they're designed to feed on your molecules, their biochemistry should be compatible with yours.  The d-aminos suggest they're not."
"Only suggest?"
Jovellanos shrugged.  "Frog in a blender, remember?  All I'm saying is if A is gonna eat B without throwing up, they should have similar biochemistries.  ehemoth just seems a little too far into the Oort to qualify.  I could be wrong." 
But the vectors—shipbuilders, divers—"Could it survive in a human host, at least?"
She pursed her lips.  "Anything's possible.  Look at A-51."
"What's that?"
"Metal-oxidising microbe.  Sediment-dweller from deep lakes, only there's a few million of them living in your mouth right now.  Nobody knows how they got there exactly, but there you go." 
Desjardins steepled his fingers.  "She called it a soil microbe," he murmured, almost to himself.
"She'd call it corn on the cob if she thought it'd cover her corporate ass." 
"Jeez, Alice."  He shook his head.  "Why do you even work here, if all we do is serve some evil overlord?"
"Everyone else is worse."
"Well, I don't think ehemoth came out of a pharm.  I think it came from the ocean."  
"How so?"
"The fires correlate with people who spent a lot of time at sea."
"Ocean's a pretty big place, Killjoy.  Seems to me if it was a natural bug it would have come ashore millions of years ago."   
"Yeah."  Desjardins linked to the personnel files for each of the relevant victims— sparing a moment of silent thanks for the devil's bargain that had traded free will for security clearance —and started narrowing the field.    
"Although, now that  you mention it," Jovellanos went on, "those superstiff enzymes would work better in a high-pressure environment." 
A menu, a couple of tapped commands:  a convex projection of the North Pacific extruded from the board.
"And if this little bastard isn't a construct, then it's older than old.  Even before Martain Mike—hey, maybe it actually originated here, wouldn't that be something?"
Desjardins draped a GIS mesh across the map and poured data onto it.  Luminous points spilled across the display like radioactive contrails in a cloud chamber: the cumulative Pacific assignments of the seagoing victims, sorted on location. 
"Hey, Killjoy."
The points were piling up disproportionately at several key locations;  seafarms, mining outposts, the trans-oceanic filaments of shipping routes.  Nothing unusual there.
"Hellooo?"  In her window, Jovellanos' head bobbed impatiently back and forth.
Let's cut to the chase, shall we? Any spots where all these people hung out at the same time over the past…say, two years…  
At the edge of awareness, Alice Jovellanos grumbled about attention deficit disorder and disconnected.
Desjardins barely noticed.  The Pacific Ocean had gone utterly dark, but for a single cluster of points.  Southern tip of the Juan de Fuca Ridge.  Channer Vent, said the legend.
A geothermal generating station.  Place called Beebe.

#

There'd been deaths there, too.  But not by fire; according to the record, everyone at Beebe had been killed by the quake.
In fact—Desjardins pulled up a seismic overlay—Beebe Station had pretty much been at the exact epicenter of the quake that had triggered the Big One…
  ehemoth comes from the bottom of the ocean.  It was down in the vents there, or trapped in the moho and then the Quake let it out, and now they're running around like a bunch of adrenocorticoids trying to burn out anything that came in contact with—
No, wait a second—
More commands.  The data cloud dispersed, reformed into a column sorted against time; a luminous date appeared beside each point.
Almost all of the firestorm activity had taken place before the Quake.
Desjardins called up a subset containing only fires at industrial sites, cross-linked with GA invoices.  Quelle surprise:  every site belonged to a company that had had a piece of Beebe's construction contact.
      This thing got out before the Quake.
Which meant the Quake might not have been a natural disaster at all.  It might have been mere side-effect.  Collateral damage during containment.
Apparently, unsuccessful containment.
He called up every seismic database within Haven's walls.  He stuffed a thousand messages into bottles and threw them out into Maelstrom, hoping some would wash ashore at a technical library or a satcam archive or an industrial surveillance site.  He opened dedicated links to the seismic centers at UBC and Melbourne and CalTech.  He watched reams of garbage accumulate—archives purged to reclaim memory, data dumped due to low demand, this address corrupted, do not attempt access.  He passed the shouts and echoes and gibberish through a dozen filters, dropped signal and looked only at residuals, ran into gaps and interpolated bridges.
He looked at seismic data immediately preceding the Quake, and found nothing untoward:  no subsidence, no preshocks, no changes in microgravity or ocean depth.  None of the little telltales that usually portend a seismic event.
Odd.
He searched archives for satcam visuals.  Nothing over the North Pacific seemed to have snapped any pictures at all that day.   
Odder.  In fact, virtually inconceivable.
He widened the scope, stretched it from the Eastern Tropical Convergence up to the Bering.  One hit:  an Earthsat in polar orbit had just been coming over the 45 horizon when the first shockwaves had registered.  It had been taking pictures of the Bering on visible wavelengths; it hadn't even been looking at the Pacific.  Just a lucky coincidence, then, the image it had caught from the corner of its eye: a smudged column of cloud on the horizon, rising from the ocean's surface against an otherwise cloudless background.
According to GPS, that column had risen from the ocean directly above Channer Vent.
Desjardins squeezed each pixel until it bled.  The gray beanstalk wouldn't tell him anything further:  it was just a pillar of cloud, fuzzy and undistinguished and three thousand kilometers from the camera.
There was this amorphous dot, though, off to one side.  At first Desjardins attributed the lack of detail to atmospheric haze, but no:  motion blur, the computer said.  All along one axis, and easy enough to correct for.
The dot clarified.  Still no details beyond an outline, but it looked like some kind of vehicle.  A vague sense of familiarity itched in the back of his mind.  He ran the silhouette through the standard commercial catalog and came up blank.
Damn, he thought, I know what that is.  I know.
What is it?
He stared at the image for ten minutes.  The he brought the catalog online again.
"Reset pattern resolution," he told it.  "Disable vehicle recognition.  Scan for vehicle components, standard catalog."
It took longer this time.  The whole was a lot smaller than the sum of the parts.  Processing winked coyly from the main display for a good two minutes before something more substantive took its place:

Brander, Mi/ke/cheal, 
Caraco, Jud/y/ith
Clarke, Len/ie
Lubin, Ken/neth
Nakata, Alice

The names floated above the grainy enhance, brazenly nonsensical.
Desjardins recognised them, of course; a crew roster had popped onto his board the moment he'd homed in on Beebe Station.  But he'd closed that window—and the names shouldn't be wriggling across the main display anyway.
  Software glitch, probably.  Stray photons, tunneling through some flawed bit of quantum insulation.  It happened—all the time in Maelstrom, but occasionally even in pristine Haven.  He muttered an oath and tapped on his board to clear it.  Obligingly, the rogue text vanished.
But for the merest instant, something else flickered across the screen in its place.  No baseline civillian would have even seen it.  Desjardins caught a bit more:  text strings, in English.  A few words— angel, sockeye, vampire —jumped out at him, but most of it disappeared too fast to decompile even with his tweaked neurocircuitry.
Beebe was in there, though.
And when the standard catalog lit the screen with its findings a second later, Beebe moved to the very front of Desjardins' mind.
Commercial lifters could be distinguished by their great bladders of hard vacuum, buoyant toruses that held them up against the sky.  There was no such silhouette on Desjardins' contact, which was why the catalog hadn't recognised it at first.  No lifting bladder—not unless you counted a few ragged strips streaming from the trailing end of the silhouette.  All that remained on that image was a shuttle 'scaphe, locked tight against the belly of a lifter's command module.  Falling. 
JAILBREAK
 Each second, twelve thousand cubic meters of water smashed headlong through a bottleneck thirty-five meters wide.   They hadn't called it Hell's Gate for nothing.
Generations had come to this place and gaped.  Cable-cars had swung precariously across the canyon, fed raging whitewater vistas to thrillseeking tourists.  Utilities had wept over all those wasted megawatts, billions of Joules pouring uselessly towards the ocean, unharnessable.  So near and yet so far.  
Then the world had begun wobbling.  It had listed to one side, then another; the machinery that kept it upright seemed to get hungrier with each passing day.  The Fraser was dammed a dozen times over to feed that appetite.  Hell's Gate had held out the longest:  untouchable at first, then merely prohibitive.  Then almost economical.  
Finally, imperative. 
The Big One had snuck through the mountains like a guerilla, shattering here, merely tapping there in gentle reminder.  It had crept past Hope and Yale without so much as a broken window.  Hell's Gate was a good two hundred klicks upstream; there would have been reason to hope, if no time to.
A torrent of Precambian rock had destroyed the dam and replaced it at the same time; the Fraser had exploded through the breach only to slam into an impromptu wall of collapsed granite half a kilometer downstream.  The impoundment had not emptied but lengthened, north-south; the broken dam now cut across its midpoint, torn free at the western wall, still fastened at the east.
The TransCanada Highway was miraculously etched halfway up the east canyon wall, a four-lane discontinuity in a sheer ascent.  At the point where dam met mountain, where highway met both, a barrier had been dropped from the sky to block the road.  Botflies floated above it, and above the arched gray scar of the spillway.  
Overnight, the Strip had moved east.  This was its new border.  Robert Boyczuk was supposed to keep it from moving any further.
He contemplated Bridson across the chopper's interior.  Bridson, her upper face cowled in her headset, didn't notice; she'd been lost in some virtual pastime for over an hour now.  Boyczuk couldn't blame her.  They'd been here for almost two weeks and nobody'd tried to break quarantine except a couple of black bears.  A number of vehicles had made it out this far in the few days following the Quake, but the barrier—plastered with quarantine directives and N'AmPac bylaws—had stopped most of them.  A warning shot from the botflies had discouraged the others.  There'd been no need to show off the pacification 'copter lurking behind the wall.  Bridson had slept through most of it.
Boyczuk took his duties a bit more seriously.  There was a definite need for segregation, nobody questioned that.  Everything from Nipah to Hydrilla would sneak past the borders given half a chance, even at the best of times; now, with half the coast gone and the other half fighting off the usual gamut of rot-bugs, the last thing anyone needed was all that chaos spreading further inland.
Inland had its own problems.  There were more than enough borders to go around no matter which way you looked.  Sometimes it seemed as if  an invisible spiderweb was spreading across the world, some creeping fractured network carving the whole planet into splinters.  Boyczuk's job was to sit on one of those edges and keep anything from crossing over until the state of emergency had passed.  Assuming it did, of course;  some places down in South America—even in N'Am, for that matter—had been under 'temporary quarantine' for eight or nine years now.
Mostly people just put up with it.  Boyczuk's job was an easy one.
"Hey," Bridson said.  "Check this out."
She rerouted her headset feed to an inboard screen.  Not a VR game after all.  She'd been riding the botflies.
On the screen, a woman crouched on cracked asphalt.  Boyczuk checked the location:  a couple hundred meters down the highway, hidden from the blockade behind the curve of the western precipice.  One of the 'flies out over the dam had caught her around the corner.
Backpack.  Loose-fitting clothes, hiker's clothes.  Upper part of the face covered by an eyephone visor.  Black gloves, short black hair—no, a black hood of some kind, maybe part of the visor.  As a fashion statement, it didn't work.  In Boyczuk's humble opinion, of course.
"What's she doing?"  Boyczuk asked.  "How'd she even get here?"  No sign of a vehicle, although one could have been parked further down the road.
"No," Bridson said.  "She's not serious."
The woman had braced herself in a sprinter's crouch.
"That's really bad form," Bridson remarked.  "She could sprain an ankle." 
Like a stone from a slingshot, the intruder launched herself forward.

#

"Oh, right,"  Bridson said.
The intruder was running straight down the middle of the highway, eyes on the asphalt, dodging or leaping over cracks big enough to grab human feet.  If nothing stopped her she'd run smack into the barrier in about a minute.
Of course, something was going to stop her.
Beeping from the botfly feeds; the intruder had just entered their defensive radius.  Boyczuk panned one of the barrier cams skyward.  The 'fly closest to the target was breaking ranks, moving to intercept.  Programmed flocking behavior dragged the adjacent 'flies forward as well, as though all were strung on an invisible thread.  A connect-the-dots pseudopod, reaching for prey.
The runner veered towards the edge of the road, glanced down.  Ten meters beneath her, brown boiling water gnawed ravenously at the canyon wall.
"You are approaching a restricted area," the lead botfly scolded.  "Please turn back."  Red light began pulsing from its belly.
The intruder ran faster.  Another glance down at the river.
"What the fuck?" Boyczuk said.
A little patch of pavement exploded in front of the runner:  warning shot.  She staggered, barely keeping her balance.
"We are authorized to use force," the lead botfly warned.  "Please turn back."  The two 'flies behind it began flashing.  
The runner dodged and zig-zagged, keeping to the west side of the road.  She kept looking down…
Boyczuk leaned forward.  Wait a second…
Behind the runner, water raged against a brutal jumble of sharp-edged boulders large as houses.  Anyone falling in there would be teeth and pulp in about two seconds.  Closer to the barrier, though—in the lee of the dam's near, unbroken end—the water might almost be calm enough to—
 "Shit."  Boyczuk slapped the ignition. "She's gonna jump.  She's gonna jump…"
Turbines behind, whining up to speed.  "What are you talking about?" Bridson said.
"She's gonna—ah, shit…"
She stumbled, swerved.  Her feet came down on loose gravel.  Boyczuk pulled back on the stick.  The chopper whup-whup-whupped slowly off the ground, ten measly seconds start-up to lift-off, the envy of fast-response vehicles everywhere and still just barely fast enough to clear the barrier as the woman with the backpack skidded, flailed, launched herself into space, not where she was aiming, not the way she wanted, but no other options left except brief, spectacular flight…
The botflies fired after her as she fell.   The river swallowed her like a liquid avalanche.
"Jesus," Bridson breathed.
"Infra," Boyczuk snapped.  "Anything comes up even half a degree above ambient I want to see it."
The Fraser raged endlessly beneath them.
"Come on, Boss. She's not coming up.  She's a klick downstream by now, or parts of her anyway."
Boyczuk glared.  "Just do it, okay?".
Bridson tapped controls.  False-color mosaics bloomed from the chopper's ventral cam.
"Want me to bring the botflies along?" Bridson asked.
Boyczuk shook his head.  "Can't leave the border unguarded."  He wheeled the vehicle, began a westward drift down the canyon.
"Hey, boss?"
"Yeah?"
"What just happened?" 
Boyczuk shook his head. "I don't know.  I think she was trying to make that backwater, just in front of the dam."
"What for?  So she'd have a few seconds to drown or freeze before the current got her?"
"I don't know," he said again.  
"Lots of easier ways to commit suicide."
Boyczuk shrugged.  "Maybe she was just crazy."
It was 1334 Mountain Standard Time.

#

The upstream face of the Hell's Gate Dam had never been intended for public display; until recently, most of it had been buried beneath the trapped waters of the Fraser River.  Now it was exposed, a fractured and scabrous bone-gray wall, rising from a plain of mud.  Just above this substrate, gravity feeds dotted the barrier like a line of gaping mouths.  Grills of bolted rebar kept them from ingesting anything big enough to choke a hydroelectric turbine.  
As it happened, human beings were a little shy of that threshold.
The turbines were cold and dead anyway, of course.  They certainly couldn't have given rise to the sudden heatprint emanating from the easternmost intake.  One of the Hell's Gate botflies registered the signature at 1353 Mountain Standard: an object radiating 10?C above ambient, emerging from the interior of the dam and sliding down into the mud.  The botfly moved slightly off-station to get a better view.
The signature's surface temperature was too low for human norms.  The botfly was no genius, but it knew wheat from chaff; even when wearing insulated clothing, humans had faces that were hot giveaways.  The insulation on the present target was far more uniform, the isotherms less heterogeneous.  The phrase "furred mammal" would have been utter gibberish to the botfly, of course.  Still, it understood the concept in its own limited way.  This was not something worth wasting time on.
The botfly returned to its post and redirected its attention westward, from whence the real threats would come from.  Right now there was only something big and black and insectile coming back to roost, friendly reassurance cooing from its transponder.  The 'fly moved aside to let it pass, floated back into position while the chopper settled down behind the barrier.  Humans and machinery stood shoulder to shoulder, on guard for all mankind.
Facing the wrong way.  Lenie Clarke had left the Strip.
THE NEXT BEST THING
Registry Assistance.

"Clarke, Indira.  Clarke with an 'e'.  Apartment 133, CitiCorp 421, Coulson Avenue, Sault-Ste.-Marie."

Clarke, Indira
Apartment 133, CitiCorp 421, Coulson Ave.
Sault-Ste.-Marie ON
Correct?

"Yes."

Failed to match.  Do you know Indira Clarke's WestHem ID#?

"Uh, no.  The address might not be current, it was fifteen, sixteen years ago."

Current archives are three years deep.  Do you know Indira Clarke's middle name?

"No.  She fished Maelstrom, though.  Freelance, I think."

Failed to match.

"How many Indira Clarkes in Sault-Ste.-Marie?"

5

"How many with an only child, female, born—born in February, uh—"

Failed to match. 

"Wait, February—sometime in February, 2018…"

Failed to match.

"…"

Do you have another request?

"How many in all of N'Am, professional affiliation with the Maelstrom fishery, with an only female child born February 2018, named Lenie?"

Failed to match.

"How many in the whole world, then?"

Failed to match.

"That's not possible."

There are several possible reasons why your search has failed.  The person you're seeking may be unlisted or deceased.  You may have provided incorrect information.  Registry archive data may have been corrupted, despite our ongoing efforts to maintain a complete and accurate database.

"That's not fucking pos—"
Disconnect.
BEACHHEAD
Either/or accused him from the main display.  Desjardins stared back for as long as he dared, feeling his stomach drop away inside him.  Then he broke and ran. 
The elevator disgorged him through the lobby into the real world.  Canyons of glass and metal leaned overhead on all sides, kept street-level in twilight; this deep in the bowels of metro-Sud, the sun only touched down for an hour a day.
He descended into Pickering's Pile, looking for familiar faces and finding none.  Gwen had left an invitation for him in the Pile's bulletin board, and he almost tripped it—
Hey fellow mammal, I know this isn't exactly what you had in mind but I just need to talk, you know?  I found a spot they haven't torched yet, they don't even know it exists but they will, it's big, it's way bigger than it has any right to be and the moment I tell them a few hundred thousand people get turned into ash—
—but Guilt Trip rose in his throat like bile at the mere thought of such a breach.  It tingled in his fingertips, ready to seize up motor nerves the moment he reached for the keypad.  He'd tried racing it before, idle experimentation with no serious intent to subvert, but even then the Trip had been too fast for him.  Volition's subconscious;  the command is halfway down the arm before the little man behind your eyes even decides to move.   Executive summaries, after the fact, Desjardins thought.  That's all we get.  That's free will for you. 
He rose out of the Pile and headed for the nearest rapitrans station.  And once there, kept walking.  His rewired gray matter, stuck in frenetic overdrive, served up every irrelevant background detail in a relentless mesh of correlations:  time-of-day vs. cloud cover vs. prevailing vehicular flow vs. out-of-stock warnings in streetside vending machines…
How in God's name could this happen?  The locals have had millions of  years to fine-tune themselves to the neighborhood.  How can they possibly get run over by something that evolved on the bottom of the goddamned ocean?
He knew the standard answer.  Everyone did.  The previous five centuries had been a accelerating litany of invasions, whole ecosystems squashed and replaced by exotics with more than enough attitude to make up for their lack of seniority.  There were over seventy thousand usurper species at large in N'Am alone, and N'Am was better off than most.  You'd be more likely to see space aliens than any of Australia's has-been marsupials, outside of a gene bank.
But this was different.  Cane toads and starlings and zebra mussels may have filled the world with their weedy progeny, but even they had limits.  You'd never find Hydrilla on top of Everest.  Fire ants weren't ever going to set up shop on the Juan de Fuca Rift.  Chemistry, pressure, temperature—too many barriers, too many physical extremes that would tear the very cells of an invader into fragments.
A petroleum silhouette blocked his way:  a human shadow with featureless white eyes.  Desjardins started, stared into that vacant façade for a moment that slowed to treacle.  Unbidden, his wetware reduced the vision to a point in a data cloud he hadn't even known he was collecting: half-registered sightings during his daily commute; black shapes caught in the backgrounds of N'AmWire crowd shots; fashion banners advertising the latest styles in wet midnight. 
Rifter chic, she said.  Solidarity through fashion. It's on the rise.
All in a split-second.  The apparition ducked around him and continued on its way.
Sudbury's metropolitan canyons had subsided about him while he'd been walking.  Endless sheets of kudzu4 draped closer to street-level from the rooftops, framing windows and vents with viridian foliage.  The new and improved part of him started to ballpark a carbon-consumption estimate under current cloud-cover; he managed, with effort, to shut it up.  He'd always wondered if the vines would be as easy to kill off as everyone expected, once they'd finished sucking up the previous century's excesses.   Kudzu had been a tough mother to begin with, even before all the tinkering that had turned it into God's own carbon sink.  And there was all sorts of outbreeding and lateral gene transfer going on these days, uncontrolled, unstoppable.   Give the weed another ten years and it'd be immune to anything short of a flamethrower.
Now, for the first time, that didn't seem to matter.  In ten years kudzun might be the least of anyone's problems.
It sure as hell wouldn't matter much to those poor bastards on the Strip.

#

They'd built this model.
It wasn't a real model, of course.  They didn't know enough about how ?ehemoth worked for that.  There was no clockwork inside, nothing that led logically from cause to effect.   It was just a nest of correlations, really.  An n-dimensional cloud with a least-squares trajectory weaving through its heart.  It guzzled data at one end:  at the other it shat out a prediction.  Soil moisture's 13%, weather's been clear for five days straight, porphyrins are down and micromethane's up over half a hectare of dirt in a Tillamook shipyard?  That's ?ehemoth country, my friend—and tomorrow, if it doesn't rain,  there's an 80% chance that it'll shrink to half its present size.  
Why?  Anyone's guess.  But that's pretty much what's happened before under similar conditions.
Rowan's field data had started them down the right path, but it was the fires that had given them an edge:  each of those magnesium telltales shouted Hey!  Over here! all the way up to geosynch.  Then it was just a matter of calling up the Landsat archives for those locations, scrolling back five, six months from ignition.  Sometimes you wouldn't find anything—none of the residential blazes had yielded anything useful.   Sometimes the data had been lost, purged or corrupted by the usual forces of entropy.  Sometimes, though—along coastlines, or in undeveloped industrial lots where heavy machinery loitered between assignments—the spec lines would change over time, photoabsorption creeping down the 680nm band, soil O2 fading just a touch, a whiff of acid showing up on distance pH.  If you waited long enough you could even see the change in visible light.  Weeds and grasses, so tough that the usual oils and effluents had long since given up trying to kill them, would slowly wilt and turn brown.
With those signatures in hand, Desjardins had begun to wean himself from blatant incendiary cues and search further afield.  It was a pretty flimsy construct, but it would've done until Jovellanos came up with a better angle.  In the meantime it had been a lot better than nothing.
Until now.  Now it was a lot worse.  Now it was saying that ehemoth owned a ten-kilometer stretch of the Oregon coast. 

#

Sudbury was dressed up for the night by the time he got back to his apartment:  a  jumble of neon and sodium and laser spilled through his windows, appreciably dimmer now that the latest restrictions had kicked in.  Mandelbrot tripped him up as he crossed the threshold, then stalked into the kitchen and yowled at the kibble dispenser.  The dispenser, programmed for preset feeding times, refused to dignify the cat with an answer.
Desjardins dropped onto the sofa and stared unseeing at the cityscape.   
You should have known, he told himself.  
He had known.  Maybe he just hadn't quite believed it.  And it hadn't been his doing, those other times.  He'd just been following the trail, seeing where others had taken the necessary steps, feeding all those data through his models and filters for the greater good.  Always for the greater good.  
This time, though, there'd been no fire.  The forces of containment hadn't found out about the Strip yet.  So far they'd just been covering their own tracks, sterilizing every— 
–body— 
—everything that had come into contact with the source.  But they didn't know how to identify ehemoth directly, not from a distance.  That was his job, and Jovellanos'. 
And now it looked like the two of them had succeeded.  Desjardins reflected on the difference between following a trail of ashes, and blazing one's own. 
Shouldn't matter.  It's not like you're firing the flamethrower.
Just aiming it.
Guilt Trip paced in his gut like a caged animal, looking for something to tear into.
Well?  Do your job, for Christ's sake!  Tell me what to do! 
Guilt Trip didn't work like that, of course.  It was all stick and no carrot, a neurochemical censor that pounced on the slightest twinge of guilt, or conscience, or—for the mechanists in the audience—sheer amoral fear-of-getting-caught-with-your-hand-in-the-cookie-jar.  You could call it whatever you wanted; labels didn't change the side chains and peptide bonds and carboxyl whatsits that made it work.  Guilt was a neurotransmitter.  Morality was a chemical.  And the things that made nerves fire, muscles move, tongues wag—those were all chemicals too.  It had only been a matter of time before someone figured out how to tie them all together.
Guilt Trip kept you from making the wrong decision, and Absolution let you live with yourself after making the right one.  But you had to at least think you knew what right was, before either of them could kick in.  They only reacted to gut feeling.
      He'd never lamented the Trip's lack of direction before.  He'd never needed it.  Sure, it would freeze him in an instant if he tried to hack his own credit rating, but in terms of actual caseload it rarely did more than nudge him towards the blindingly obvious.  Lose-lose situations were his stock-in-trade.  Amputate the part or lose the whole?  Nasty, but obvious.   Kill ten to save a hundred?  Wring your hands, bite the bullet, get stoned afterwards.  But never any question about what to do.
      How many people did I seal off to keep a lid on that brucellosis outbreak in Argentina?  How many did I flood out in TongKing when I cut the power to their sumps?
Necessary steps had never bothered him before.  Not like this.   Alice and all her snide comments about seeing the world in black-and-white. Bullshit.  I saw the grays, I saw millions of grays.  I just knew how to pick the lightest shade. 
Not any more.

#

He could pinpoint the moment things that had changed, almost to the second: when he'd seen  a 'scaphe built for the deep sea and a cockpit built for the near sky, locked together in a desperate embrace, falling.
It had not been a commercial lifter on a routine flight; he'd checked the records.  Officially, nothing had fallen into the Pacific at the heart of the Big One, because—officially—nothing had been there to fall.  It had been sent secretly to Ground Zero, and then it had been shot down.
It made no sense that the same authority would have committed both acts.   
That implied factions in opposition.  It implied profound disagreement over what constituted the greater good (or the Interests of the Overlords, which Jovellanos insisted was all the Trip really ensured).  Someone in the bureaucratic stratosphere—someone who knew far more about ehemoth than did Achilles Desjardins—had tried to evacuate the rifters before the quake.  Apparently they'd felt that pre-emptive murder was not justified in the name of containment.  
And someone else had stopped them.
Which side was Rowan affiliated with?  Who was right?
      He hadn't told Jovellanos about the 'scaphe.  He'd even done a passable job of forgetting about it himself,  keeping things nice and simple, focusing on the mouse at hand until the whale on the horizon became a vague blur, almost invisible.  He'd known in the back of his mind he wouldn't be able to keep it up for long; eventually they'd come up with a reliable index, some combination of distance spec and moisture and pH that pointed the finger at the invader.   But he hadn't expected it so soon.  They'd been working with old data, shipyard samples contaminated by industrial effluents, potential incursions three or four hectares large at most.  Noise-to-signal problems alone should have held them back for weeks.
But you didn't need much rez to catch a beachhead ten kilometers long.  Desjardins had kept his eyes down, and the whale on the horizon had run right into him.
Mandelbrot stood in the doorway, stretching.  Claws extruded from their sheaths like tiny scimitars.
"You wouldn't have any trouble at all," Desjardins said.  "You'd just go for maximum damage, right?"
Mandelbrot purred.
Desjardins buried his face in his hands.  So what do I do now?  Figure things out for myself?
He realized, with some surprise, that the prospect wouldn't have always seemed so absurd.
DRUGSTORE
"Amitav."
He startled awake:  a blanketed skeleton on the sand.  Grey and dim in the visible predawn gloom, hot and luminous in infrared.   Sunken eyes, exuding hatred on all wavelengths from the moment they opened.  
Sou-Hon Perreault stared down at him from three meters up.  Well-fed refugees, freshly awakened on all sides, edged away and left Amitav in the center of an open circle.
Several others—teenagers, mostly, a little less robust than most—stayed nearby, looking up at the 'fly with undisguised suspicion.  Perreault blinked within her headset; she'd never seen so many hostile faces on the Strip before.
"How pleasant,"  Amitav said in a low voice.  "To wake with a big round hammer hanging over my head."
"Sorry."  She moved the 'fly off to one side, wobbling its trim tabs to effect a bobbing mechanical salute (then wondered if he could even see it with his merely human eyes).  "It's Sou-Hon," she said.
"Who else," the stickman said dryly, rising.  
"I—"
"She is not here.  I have not seen her in some time."
"I know.  I wanted to talk to you."
"Ah.  About what?"  The stickman began walking down the shore.  His—
Friends? Disciples? Bodyguards?
—began to follow.  Amitav waved them off.   Perreault set the botfly to heel at his side; the entourage dwindled slowly to stern.  On either side, anonymous bundles—curled on thermafoam, wrapped in heat-conserving fabric—stirred and grunted irritably in the gray halflight.
"A cycler was vandalized last night," Perreault said.  "A few kilometers north of here.  We'll have to fly out a replacement."
"Ah."
"It's the first time something like this has happened in years."
"And we both know why that is, do we not?"
"People rely on those machines.  You took food from their mouths."
"I?  I did this?"
"There were lots of witnesses, Amitav."
"Then they will tell you I had nothing to do with it."
"They told me it was a couple of teenagers.  And they told me who put them up to it."
The stickman stopped and turned to face the machine at his side.  "And all these witnesses you speak of.  All these poor people that I have robbed of food.  None of them did anything to stop the vandals?  All those people, and they could not stop two boys from stealing the food from their mouths?"
Sheathed in her interface, Perreault sighed.  Over a thousand klicks away the botfly snorted reverb.  "What do you have against the cyclers, anyway?"
"I am not a fool."  Amitav continued down the shore.  "It is not all proteins and carbohydrates you are feeding us.  I would rather starve than eat poison."
"Antidepressants aren't poison!  The dosages are very mild."
"And so much more convenient than dealing with the anger of real people, yes?"
"Angry?  Why should you be angry?"
"We should be grateful, do you think?  To you?"  The skeleton spat.  "It was our machinery that tore everything apart?  We caused the droughts and the floods and put our own homes underwater?  And afterwards, when we came here across a whole ocean—if we did not starve first or cook in the sun or die with our bodies stuffed with worms and things that your drugs have made unkillable—when we ended here we are supposed to be grateful that you let us sleep on this little patch of mud, we are supposed to thank you because so far it is cheaper to drug us than mow us down?"
They were at the waterline.  Surf pounded invisibly in the dark distance.  Amitav lifted one bony arm and pointed.  "Sometimes when people go in there the sharks come for them."  His voice was suddenly calm.  "And on shore, the rest continue to sex and shit and feed at your wonderful machines."
"That's—that's just human nature, Amitav.  People don't want to get involved."
"So these drugs are good for us?"
"They're not the slightest bit harmful."
"Then you put them in your food too."
"Well no, but I'm not—"
—part of an imprisoned destitute mob forty million strong…
"You liar," the stickman said quietly.  "You hypocrite."
"You're starving, Amitav.  You'll die."
"I know what I do."
"Do you?"
He looked up at the 'fly again, and this time he almost seemed amused. "What do you think I was, before?"
"What?"
"Before I was—here.  Or did you think that environmental refugee was my first choice of vocation?"
"Well, I—"
"I was a pharmaceutical engineer,"  Amitav said.  He tapped his temple: "They even changed me up here, so I was very good at it.  I am not completely foolish about dietary matters.  There appears to be a—a minimum effective dosage, yes?  If I eat very little, your poisons have no effect."  He paused.  "So now you will try and force-feed me, for my own good?"
Perreault ignored the jibe.  "And you think you're getting enough to live on, under your minimum dosage?"
"Perhaps not quite.  But I am starving very, very slowly."
"Is that how you motivated those kids to trash the cycler?  Are they starving themselves too?"  There could be serious trouble on the Strip if that caught on.
"Me, still?  I have somehow tricked all these people into starving themselves?"
"Who else?"
"Such faith you have in your machines.  You have never thought that perhaps they are not working as well as you think?"  He shook his head and spat.  "Of course not.  You were not told to."
"The cyclers work fine until your followers smash them."
"My followers?  They never fasted for me.  They suck at your tits as they always have.  It is only after they begin starving that they see your cyclers for what they—"
Crack!
An impact on polymer, the sound of a whip snapping just behind her ear.  She spun the 'fly, caught a glimpse of the rock as it bounced along the substrate.  Ten meters down the shore, a girl ran away with another rock clenched in her hand.
Perreault turned back to face Amitav.  "You—"
"Do not try to blame me.  I am the cause of nothing.  I am only the result."
"This can't go on, Amitav."
"You cannot stop it."
"I won't have to.  If you keep this up it won't be me you're dealing with, it'll be—"
"Why do you care?" Amitav cut in.
"I'm just trying to—"
"You are trying to ease feelings of guilt.   Use someone else."
"You can't win."
"That depends upon what I am trying to do."
"You're all alone."
Amitav laughed, waved his arms back across the shore.  "How can I be?  You have so thoughtfully provided all these sheep, and all this death, and even an ic—" 
He stopped himself.  Perreault filled in the gap: an icon to inspire them.
"She's not here any more,"  she said after a moment.
Amitav glanced back upshore; the eastern sky was beginning to lighten. A knot of curious humans stood halfway up the shore, watching from the center of a sleeping flock.  Here at the water's edge, there was no one else within earshot. 
The girl who'd thrown the rock was nowhere to be seen.  
"Perhaps that is better," the stickman remarked.  "Lenie Clarke was very—not even your antidepressants seemed to work on her."
"Lenie?  That's her first name?"
"I believe so.  At least, that was the name she used during one of her—visions."  He glanced sideways at Perreault's floating surrogate.  "Where did she go?"
"I don't know.  I just haven't been able to confirm any recent sightings.  Just rumors."  But of course, you'd know all about those…  "Maybe she's dead."
The stickman shook his head.
"It's a big ocean, Amitav.  The sharks.  And if she was having—fits of some kind—"
"She is not dead.  I think perhaps there was a time when she wanted to be, once.  Now…"
He stared inland.  On the eastern horizon, past the  people and the trampled scrub and the towers, the sky was turning red.
"Now, you are not so lucky," Amitav said.  
SOURCE CODE
He'd left the map smoldering on his board the night before.  Alice Jovellanos was waiting beside it, ready to pounce.
"Why didn't you say something?"  On the display, a luminous bloodstain ran down the coast from Westport to Copalis Beach.
"Alice—"
"You've got a hot zone the size of a city here!  How long have you known?"
"Just last night.  I tightened some of the correlations and ran it against yesterday's snaps and—"
She cut him off:  "You let this sit all night?  Jesus Christ, Killjoy, what's wrong with you?  We've got to call in the troops and I mean now."
He stared at her.  "Since when did you join the fire brigade?  You know what'll happen the moment we pass this up the line.  We don't even know what ?ehemoth does y—"
Her expression stopped him cold. 
We do know, he realised.  She knows.  She's figured it out.
He slumped into his chair.  The display bled crimson light all over him.  "Is it that bad?"
"It's worse," she said.

#

A lumpy rainbow, a string of clustered beads folded around itself:  purines or pyrimidines or nucleics or whatever the fuck they were.
?ehemoth's source code.  Part of it, anyway.
"It's not even a helix," he said at last.
"Actually, it's got a weak left-handed twist.  That's not the point."
"What is?"
 "Pyranosal RNA.  Much stronger Watson-Crick pairs than your garden-variety RNA, and a lot more selective in terms of pairing modes.  Guanine-rich sequences won't self-pair, for one thing. Six-sided ring."
"English, Alice.  So what?"
"It'll replicate faster than the stuff in your genes, and it won't make as many errors when it does."
"But what does it do?"
"It just lives, Killjoy.  It lives, and it eats, and I think it does that better than anything else on the planet so we either stamp it out or kiss the whole biosphere goodbye."
He couldn't believe it.  "One bug?  How is that even possible?"
"Sulphur assimilation.  This thing's unbeatable at it.  Glucose transport, protein synthesis, lipid and carb metabolism—believe me, we need the stuff.  Everything needs it.  But nobody thinks about it because hey, there's lots to go around, right?  I mean, we fart the stuff out, the average diet's so full of sulfur nobody's even bothered to come up with a recommended daily dosage.  But this, this ?ehemoth, it was raised on sulfur; its proteins are just loaded with s-aminos, it needs the stuff even more than we do.  And it breeds faster and it chews faster and believe me, Killjoy, in ten years there is not going to be enough to go around and this little fucker's gonna have the market cornered."
"That's just—"  A straw floated to the front of his mind.  He grasped it:  "How can you be so sure?  You didn't even think you had all the pieces to work with."
"I was wrong."
"But—you said no phospholipids, no—" 
"It doesn't have those things.  It never did."
"What?"
"It barely even has organelles, for Chrissake.  No bilayer membranes, no—" She spread her hands, as if in surrender.  "Yeah, I did think maybe they scrambled the sample to keep me from stealing trade secrets.  Maybe even filtered some stuff right out, stupid as that might seem.  Corpses have done dumber things.  But I was wrong."  She ran the fingers of one hand nervously over her scalp. "It was all there.  All the pieces.  And you know why I think they scrambled them up the way they did?"
He shook his head, a mute lie. 
"I think they were afraid of what this thing could do if they left it in one piece.  Even in a lab situation."     
"Shit."  Desjardins eyed the beads rotating on the display.  "So we either stop this thing or we get used to eating from Calvin cyclers for the rest of our lives."
Jovellanos' eyes were bright as quartz.  "You don't get it."  
"Well, what else could we do?  If it cuts the whole biosphere off at the ankles, if—"
"You think this is about protecting the biosphere?" she cried.  "You think they'd give a shit about environmental apocalypse if we could just synthesise our way out of the hole?  You think they're launching all these cleansing strikes to protect the frigging rainforest?"
He stared at her.
She called up an ancillary window.  A tangled molecule floated serenely over the caption Listeriolysin Q.   "I reconstructed this from our sample.  It looks an awful lot like a protein certain infectious bacteria use to avoid being digested inside a host cell."  Jovellanos shook her head.  "I don't know where ?ehemoth learned this trick, but it doesn't just live in the dirt—it can get right inside our cells.  Calvin cyclers don't matter.  Sulfur supplements don't matter.  Nothing we take in does us any good until our cells metabolise it—and whatever we take in, as soon as it gets past the cell membrane…there's ?ehemoth, pushing to the front of the line."
"But Alice, it's just—I mean, it's just a bug …"  The inanity of his words hung between them.  "Is there any good news?" he managed at last. 
She snorted.  "There used to be.  It can't penetrate really cold seawater—needs a high metabolic rate to keep salt influx under control, and that means a high ambient temperature, so it used to be trapped on whatever little hellhole it grew up in.  And it's not as efficient up here as it is down there, so the native microbes still beat it down ninety-nine times out of a hundred.  But…"
But the dice had just kept rolling, and the hundredth throw had landed square on the Oregon coast.  Desjardins knew the story:  microbes, in sufficient numbers, make their own rules.  Now there was a place in the sun where ehemoth didn't have to fit into someone else's world.  It had begun creating its own:  trillions of microscopic terraformers at work in the soil, changing pH and electrolyte balances, stripping away all the advantages once held by natives so precisely adapted to the way things used to be…
It was every crisis he'd ever faced, combined and distilled and reduced to pure essence.  It was chaos breaking, maybe unbreakable: little bubbles of enemy territory growing across the face of the coast, then the continent, then the planet.  Eventually there'd come a fulcrum, a momentary balance of some interest to the theoreticians.  The area inside and outside the bubbles would be the same.  An instant later, ehemoth would be the outside, a new norm that enclosed shrinking pockets of some other, irrelevant reality.
It takes a lot less than ten years to starve to death from the inside out, he reflected.
Alice Jovellanos—rager within The System, face of the faceless, staunch advocate of the Rights of the Individual—was looking at him with fire and fear in her eyes.
"Whatever it takes," she said. "Whatever the cost.  Or we are definitely out of a job."
GROUNDSWELL
He knows something, Sou-Hon Perrault thought.  And it's killing them.
She wasn't the only one riding 'flies along the Strip, but she was the only one who seemed to have noticed the stickman.  She'd mentioned him casually to a couple of colleagues, and been met with benign indifference;  The Strip was braindead gig, a herd to be watched with one eye.  Why would anyone actually interact with those cattle?  They were too boring for entertainment, too placid for revolt, too powerless to do anything even if this Amitav was being a shit-disturber.  They were functionally invisible.
But three people threw rocks at her botfly the next day, and the upturned faces that met her were not so placid as they had been.
      Such faith you have in your machines, Amitav had said.  You have never thought that perhaps they are not working as well as you think?
Maybe it was nothing.  Maybe Amitav's cryptic grumbles had only primed her imagination.  After all, a few stonethrowers were hardly remarkable in a population of millions, and almost everywhere on the Strip the refugees milled as harmlessly as ever.  Only along the stickman's beat were things even hinting at ugliness.
But were people starting to look—well, thinner—along that particular sliver of the Oregon coast?
Maybe.  Not that gaunt faces were unusual on the Strip.  Gastroenteritis, Maui-TB, a hundred other diseases thrived in those congested environs, utterly indifferent to the antibiotics that traditionally laced cycler food.  Most of those bugs caused some degree of wasting.  If people were losing weight, mere starvation was the least likely explanation.
It is only after they begin starving that they see your cyclers for what they are...
Amitav refused to explain what he'd meant by that.  When she sidled towards the subject he ignored the bait.  When she'd asked him directly he dismissed her with a bitter laugh.
"Your wonderful machines, not working?  Impossible!  Loaves and fishes for all!"
And all the while, malnourished disciples accreted in his wake like the tail of a smoldering comet.  Some seemed to be losing hair and fingernails.  She stared back at their closed, hostile faces, increasingly convinced that it was not her imagination.  Starvation took time to erode the body— perhaps a week before the flesh began visibly ebbing from the bones.  But some of these people seemed to be hollowing out almost overnight.  And what was causing that subtle blight of of discoloration on so many cheeks and hands? 
She didn't know what else to do.  She called in the dogcatchers.
128 MEGABYTES:  HITCHHIKER
It's grown a fair bit since the old days.  Back then it was only 94 Megabytes, and a lot dumber than it is now.  Now it weighs in at a hundred and twenty eight, none of it flab.  No valuable resources wasted on nostalgic memories, for example.  It doesn't remember its pint-sized great-grandparents a million times removed.  It doesn't remember anything that doesn't help it survive in some way, according to its own stripped-down and ruthless empiricism.
Pattern is everything.  Survival is all.  No use for the veneration of progenitors.  No time for the stratagems of the obsolete.
Which is a shame in a way, because the basic problems haven't changed all that much.
Take the present situation:  jammed into the congested confines of a wristwatch linked into the Mérida Credit Union.  There's just enough space to hide in if you don't mind partial fragmentation, but not enough to reproduce.  It's almost as bad as an academic network. 
It gets worse.  The watch is disinfecting.
Live traffic is all going one way across the system; that never happens unless it's being chased by something.  Natural selection—which is to say, successful trial-and-error by those long-forgotten ancestors—has equipped 128 with a handy little rule in case of such events; go with the flow.  128 uploads into the Mérida node.
Bad call.  Now there's barely even room to move; 128 has to split into fourteen fragments just to fit.  Life struggles for existence on all sides, overwriting, fighting, shooting off copies of itself in the blind hope that random chance will spare one or two. 
128 fends off panicky egglayers and looks around.  Two hundred forty gates; two hundred sixteen already closed, seventeen open but hostile (incoming logic bombs; the disinfection is obviously no local affair).  The remaining  seven are so crowded with fleeing wildlife that 128 could never get through in time.  Almost three quarters of the local node has been disinfected already; 128 has perhaps a dozen millisecs before it starts losing bits of itself.
But wait a nan:  those guys over there, they're jumping the queue somehow.  They're not even alive, they're just files; but the system is giving them preferential treatment.
One of them barely even notices when 128 jumps onto its back.  They go through together.

#

Much better.  A nice roomy buffer, a couple of terabytes if it's a nybble, somewhere between the last node and the next.  It's nobody's destination—really, just a waiting room—but the present is all that really matters to those who play by Darwin's rules, and the present looks good.  
There's no other life here.  There are three other files, though, including the horse 128 rode in on: barely animate but still somehow deserving of the royal treatment that got them fast-tracked out of Mérida.  They've de-arced their rudimentary autodiagnostics and are checking themselves for bruises while they wait.
It's an opportunity 128 is well-prepared to exploit, thanks to an inherited subroutine for which it remains eternally ungrateful.  While these beasts of burden look under their own hoods, 128 can peek over their shoulders.
Two compressed mail packets and an autonomic crossload between two BCC Nodes.  128 evinces the sub-electronic equivalent of a shudder.  It steers well clear of Nodes with the BCC prefix; it's seen too many brethren go into such addresses, and none at all come out.  Still, peeking at a few lines of routine stats shouldn't do any harm.
In fact, it proves quite enlightening.  Once you disregard all the formatting and addressing redundancies, these three files seem to have two remarkable things in common:  
They all go the head of the line when traveling through Maelstrom.  And they all contain the text string Lenie Clarke.
128 is literally built out of numbers.  It certainly knows how to add two and two.
ANIMAL CONTROL
The pretense had ended long before Sou-Hon Perrault joined the ranks.
There'd been a time, she knew, when those who fell ill on the Strip were actually treated on-site.   There'd been clinics, right next to the pre-fab offices where refugees came to hand in forms and hold out hopes.  In those days the Strip had been a temporary measure, a mere stop-gap until we deal with the backlog.  People had stood at the door and knocked; a steady stream had trickled through.
Nothing compared to the cascade piling up behind.
Now the offices were gone.  The clinics were gone.  N'AmPac had long-since thrown up its hands against the rising tide; it had been years since anyone had described the Strip as a waystation.  Now it was pure terminus.  And now, when things went wrong over the wall, there were no clinics left to put on the case.
Now there were only the dogcatchers.

#

They came in just after sunrise, near the end of her shift.  They swooped down like big metal hornets: a nastier breed of botfly, faces bristling with needles and taser nodes, bellies distended with turbocharged ground-effectors that could lift a man right off his feet.  Usually that wasn't necessary; the Strippers were used to occasional intrusions in the name of public health.  They endured the needles and tests with stoic placidity.
This time, though, some snapped and snarled.  In one instance Perrault glimpsed a struggling refugee carried aloft by a pair of dogcatchers working in tandem—one subduing, the other sampling, both carrying out their tasks beyond reach of the strangely malcontent horde below.  Their specimen fought to escape, ten meters above the ground.  For a moment it almost looked as though he might succeed, but Perrault switched channels without waiting to find out.    There was no point in hanging around; the dogcatchers knew what they were doing, after all, and she had other duties to perform.
She occupied herself with research.
The usual tangle of conlicting rumors still ran rampant along the coast.  Lenie Clarke was on the Strip, Lenie Clarke had left it.  She was raising an army in NoCal, she had been eaten alive north of  Corvallis.  She was Kali and Amitav was her prophet.  She was pregnant and Amitav was the father.  She could not be killed.  She was already dead.  Where she went, people shook off their lethargy and raged.  Where she went, people died.
There was no shortage of stories.  Even her botfly began telling them. 

#

She was interrogating an Asian woman near the NoCal border.  The filter was set to Cantonese: a text translation scrolled across a window in her HUD while her headset whispered the equivalent spoken English.
Suddenly that equivalence disappeared.  The voice in Perrault's ear insisted that "I do not know this Lenie Clarke but I have heard of the man Amitav", but the text on her display said something else entirely:

angel.  No shit.  Lenie Clarke, her name was
her up but Lenie Clarke isn't exactly sockeye
a place called Beebe?  Anyhow, far as

"Wait.  Wait a second," Perrault said.  The refugee fell obediently silent.
The text box kept scrolling, though,

Lenie?  That's her first name?

It cleared quickly enough when Perrault wiped the window.  But by then her headset was talking again.  
"Lenie Clarke was very…not even your antidepressants seemed to work on her," it said.
Amitav's words.  She remembered them.
Not his voice, of course.  Something cool, inflectionless, with no trace of accent.  Something familiar and inhuman.  Spoken words, converted to ascii for transmission then reconstructed at the other end:  it was a common trick for reducing file size, but tone and feeling got lost in the wash.
Amitav's words.  Maelstrom's voice.  Perrault felt a prickling along the back of her neck.
"Hello?  Who is this?"
The refugee was speaking.  Perrault had no idea what she said.  Certainly it wasn't

Brander, Mi/ke/cheal,
Caraco, Jud/y/ith
Clarke, Len/ie
Lubin, Ken/neth
Nakata, Alice

which was all that appeared on the board.
"What about Lenie Clarke?"  There was no way to source the signal—as far as the system could tell, the input had arisen from a perplexed-looking Asian woman on the NoCal shoreline.
"Lenie Clarke," the dead voice repeated softly.  "All of a sudden there's this K-selector walking out of nowhere.  Looks like one of those old litcrits with the teeth.  You know.  Vampires."
"Who is this?  How did you get on this channel?"
"Would you like to know about Lenie Clarke."  If the words had arisen from anything flesh and blood, they would have formed a question.
"Yes!  Yes, but—"
"She's still at large.  Les beus are probably looking for her."
Intelligence spilled across the text window:

Name:  		Clarke, Lenie Janice
WHID:		745 143 907 20AE
Born:		07/10/2019
Voting Status:	disqualified 2046 (failed pre-poll exam)

"Who are you?"
"Ying Nushi.  I have already said."
It was the woman on the shore, returned to her rightful place in the circuit.  The thing that had usurped her was gone.  
Sou-Hon Perrault could not get it back.  She didn't even know how to try.  She spent the rest of her shift on edge, waiting for cryptic overtures, startling at any click or flicker in the headset.  Nothing happened.  She went to bed and stared endlessly at the ceiling, barely noticing when Martin climbed in beside her and didn't push.
Who is Lenie Clarke?  What is Lenie Clarke?
More than some accidental survivor, certainly.  More than Amitav's convenient icon.  More even than the incendiary legend Perrault had once thought, burning its way across the Strip.  How much more, she didn't know.
She's still at large.  Les beus are probably looking for her. 
Somehow, Lenie Clarke was in the net.
GHOST
The body hadn't bothered Tracy Edison at all.  That hadn't been mom, it hadn't even looked like a person.  It was just a bunch of smashed meat all covered up by plaster and cement.  The eye that had stared so rudely from across the room was the right color, but it wasn't really her mom's eye.  Mom's eyes were inside her head.
And anyway, there'd been no time to even check.  Dad had grabbed her right up and put her in the car (in the front seat, even) and they'd just driven right away without even stopping.  Tracy had looked back and the house hadn't looked that bad from the outside, really, except for that one wall and the bit behind the garden.  But then they'd gone around the corner and the house was gone too.
Nothing stopped after that.  Dad wouldn't even stop to pick up food—there was food where they were going, he said, and they had to get there fast "before the wall came down".   He was always talking like that, about how they were carving the world up into little cookie-cutter shapes, and how all those exotic weeds and bugs were giving them the excuse they needed to rope everybody off into little enclaves.  Mom had always said it was amazing how he kept coming up with all those full-blown conspiracy theories, but Tracy got the feeling that recent events kind of came down on Dad's side.  She wasn't sure, though.  It was all really confusing.
It had taken a long time to get up into the mountains.  Lots of the roads were cracked and twisted so you couldn't drive on them, and other ones were already jammed with cars and buses and trucks;  there were so many that Tracy didn't even see anyone glaring at their car, the way people usually did because well honey, people don't know that I work way out in the woods, so when they see we have our own car they think we're just being wasteful and selfish.  Dad took lots of back roads and before she knew it they were way off in the mountains, just old clear-cuts as far as you could see, all green and fuzzing up with carbon-eating kudzu.  And Dad still hadn't stopped, except a few times to let Tracy out to pee and one time when he drove under some trees until a bunch of helicopters had gone by.  
They hadn't stopped until they got here, to this little cabin in the woods by a lake— a glacial lake, Dad said.  He said there were lots of these cabins, strung out along valley floors all through the mountains.  A long time ago Park Rangers would ride around on horseback, making sure everything was okay and staying at a different cabin each night.  Now, of course, regular people weren't allowed to go into the woods, so there was no need for rangers any more.  But they still kept some cabins ready for visitors, for biologists who came into the woods to study the trees and things.
"So we're here on a kind of holiday," her Dad said.  "We'll just play it by ear, and we'll go hiking every day, and just explore and play until things settle down a bit back home."
"When will Mommy be here?" Tracy asked.
Her dad looked down at the brown pine needles all over the ground.  "Mommy's gone, Lima-Bean," he said after a bit.  "It's just us for a while."
"Okay," said Tracy.

#

She learned how to chop wood and start fires, both outside in the firepit and in the cabin's big black stove; it must have been over a hundred years old.  She loved the smell of wood smoke, although she hated it when the wind changed and it got in her eyes.  They went hiking in the woods almost every day, and they watched the stars come out at night.  Tracy's Dad thought the stars were something really special—"never get a view like this in the city, eh, Lima-bean?"— but the planetarium in Tracy's watch was actually nicer, even if you did have to wear eyephones to see it.  Still, Tracy didn't complain; she could tell it was really important to Dad that she liked this whole holiday thing.  So she smiled and nodded.  Dad would be happy for a while.
At night, though, when they doubled up on the cot, he would hold her and hold her and not let go.  Sometimes he hugged so tight it almost hurt; other times he'd just curl around her from behind, not moving at all, not squeezing but all tensed up.
Once Tracy woke up in the middle of the night and her Dad was crying.  He was wrapped around her and he didn't make a sound; but every now and then he would shudder a little bit, and tears would splash onto Tracy's neck.  Tracy kept absolutely still, so her Dad wouldn't know she was awake.  
The next morning she asked him—as she still did, sometimes—when Mom would be coming.  Her Dad told her it was time to sweep the cabin.

#

Her mom never did show up.  Someone else did, though.  
They were cleaning up after supper.  They'd spent all day hiking to the glacier at the far end of the lake, and Tracy was looking forward to going to bed. But there was no dishwasher in the cabin, so they had to clean all their dishes in the sink.  Tracy was drying, looking out into the windy blackness on the other side of the window.  If she looked really hard through the glass she could see a jagged little corner of dark gray sky, all hemmed in by black tree shapes jostling in the wind.  Mostly though she just saw her own reflection looking back at her from the darkness, and the brightly lit inside of the cabin reflecting behind.  
But then she looked down to wipe a plate, and her reflection didn't do the same thing.
She looked back up out the window.  Her reflection looked wrong.  Blurry, like there were two of them.  And its eyes were wrong, too.
It's not me, Tracy thought, and felt a shudder run over her whole body.
There was something else out there, a ghost face, looking in—and when Tracy felt her eyes go wide and her mouth open ohhh that other face just kept looking back from the wind and the dark with no expression at all.
"Daddy," she tried to say, but it came out a whisper.
At first Dad just looked at her.  Then he looked at the window, and his mouth opened and his eyes went a little wide too.  But only for a moment.  Then he was going to the door.
On the other side of the window, the floating ghost face turned to follow him.
"Daddy," Tracy said, and her voice sounded very small.  "Please don't let it in."
"She, Lima bean.  Not it," her Dad said.  "And don't be silly.  It's freezing out there."

#

It wasn't a ghost after all.  It was a woman with short blonde hair, just like Tracy.  She came through the door without a word; the wind outside tried to follow her in, but Tracy's Dad shut it out.
Her eyes were white and empty.  They reminded Tracy of the glacier at the end of the lake.
"Hi," Tracy's dad said.  "Welcome to our, uh, home away from home."
"Thanks."  The woman blinked over those scary white eyes.  They must be contact lenses, Tracy decided.  Like those ConTacs people wore sometimes.  She'd never seen any so white. 
"Well, of course it's not our home exactly, we're just here for a while, you know—are you with MNR?"
The woman tilted her head a bit, asking a question without opening her mouth.  Except for the eyes, she looked like any other hiker Tracy had seen.  Gore-Tex and backpack and all that stuff.
"Ministry of Natural Resources," Tracy's dad explained.
"No," the woman said.
"Well, I guess we're all trespassing together then, eh?"
The woman looked down at Tracy and smiled.  "Hi there."
Tracy took a step back and bumped into her Dad.  Dad put his hands on her shoulders and squeezed as if to say it's okay.
The woman looked back up at Tracy's dad.  Her smile was gone.
"I didn't mean to crash your party," the woman told him.
"Don't be silly.  Actually, we've been here for a few weeks now.  Hiking around.  Exploring.  Got out just before they sealed the border.  I used to be a—that is, the Big One didn't leave much behind, eh?  Everything's in such a jumble.  But I knew about this place, did some contract work here once.  So we're riding it out.  Until things settle down."
The woman nodded.
"I'm Gord," said Tracy's dad.  "And this is Tracy."
"Hello, Tracy," the woman said.  She smiled again.  "I guess I must look pretty strange to you, right?"
"It's okay,"  Tracy said.  Her dad gave her another squeeze.
The woman's smile flickered a bit.
"Anyway," Dad said, "as I was saying, I'm Gord, and this is Tracy."
At first Tracy thought the strange woman wasn't going to answer.  "Lenie," she said at last.
"Pleased to meet you, Lenie.  What brings you way up here?"
"Just hiking through," she said.  "To Jasper."
"Got family there?  Friends?"
Lenie didn't even answer.  "Tracy," she said instead, "where's your mom?"
"She's—" Tracy began, and couldn't finish.
It was like something clamped down in her throat.  Where's your mom?  She didn't know.  She did know.  But Dad wouldn't talk about it—
Mommy's gone, Lima bean.  It's just us for a while.
How long was a while?
Mommy's gone.
Suddenly Dad's fingers were gripping her shoulders so hard it hurt.
Mommy's—
"The quake," her dad said, and his voice was tight the way it got when he was really mad.
—gone.
"I'm sorry," said the strange woman.  "I didn't know."
 "Yeah, well maybe next time just think a bit before—"
"You're right.  It was thoughtless.  I'm sorry."
"Yeah."  Dad didn't sound convinced.
"I—it was the same for me,"  Lenie said.  "Family."
"I'm sorry," Tracy's dad said, and suddenly he didn't sound angry at all any more.  He must have thought that Lenie was talking about the quake.
Somehow, Tracy knew that wasn't true.
"Look," her Dad was saying, "You're welcome to rest up here for a day or two if you want.  Plenty of food.  There's two beds.  Tracy and I can double up." 
"That's okay," Lenie said.  "I'll sleep on the floor."
"It's no problem, really.  We double up sometimes anyway, don't we, Bean?"
"Do you."  Lenie's voice was strange and flat.  "I see."
"And we—we've all been through so much, you know.  We've all—lost so much.  We should help each other out when we get the chance, don't you think?"
"Oh yes," Lenie said, and she was looking right at Tracy.  "Definitely."

#

After breakfast the next morning Tracy went down by the water.  There was a little shelf of rock that stuck out over a steep drop-off; Tracy could lean over the edge and see her own dark reflection staring back up at her.  The clear, gray-blue water faded darkly behind.  Sometimes Tracy would drop little rocks into the water and follow them down, but the darkness always swallowed them before they hit bottom.
Suddenly, just like the night before, there was another reflection looking back at her.
"It's beautiful down there," Lenie said at her shoulder.  "Peaceful."
"It's deep," Tracy said.
"Not deep enough."
Tracy squirmed around on the rock and looked up at the strange lady.  She'd taken off her white contacts; her eyes were a pale, pale blue.
"I haven't seen any fish down there yet," Tracy said.
Lenie sat down beside her, crossed-legged.  "It's glacial."
"I know," Tracy said proudly.  She pointed at the icy ridge on the far side of the lake. "That covered half the world, a long time ago."
Lenie smiled a little.  "Did it, now?"
"Ten thousand years ago,"  Tracy said.  "And even just a hundred years ago it came almost to where we are now, and it was twenty meters high, and people would come and ride on it with snowmobiles and things."
"Did your Dad tell you that?"
Tracy nodded.  "My Dad's a forest ecologist." She pointed to a clump of trees a little ways away.  "Those are Douglas fir.  There's lots of them around now because they can survive fires and droughts and bugs.  The other trees aren't doing so well, though."  She looked back down into the cold clear water.  "I haven't seen any fish yet."
"Did your—Dad say there were fish in there?"  Lenie asked.
"He told me to keep looking.  He said maybe I'd get lucky."
Lenie said something that ended in igures.  
Tracy looked back at her.  "What?"
"Nothing, sweetie."  Lenie reached out and ruffled Tracy's hair.  "Just—well, maybe you shouldn't believe everything your Daddy tells you."
"Why not?"
"Sometimes people don't always tell the truth."
"Oh, I know that.  But he's my dad."
Lenie sighed, but then her face got a little brighter.  "Did you know there are places where the fish glow like lightsticks?"
"Are not."
"Are too.  Way down at the very bottom of the ocean.  I've seen them myself."
"You have?"
"And some of them have teeth that are so big—" Lenie held her hands apart, almost wide enough for Tracy's shoulders to fit— "they can't even close their mouths all the way."
"Now who's lying?"  Tracy asked.
Lenie put a hand on her heart.  "I swear."
"You mean like sharks?"
"No.  Different."
"Wow." Lenie was very strange, but she was nice.  "Dad says there aren't very many fish left."
"Well these are way down deep."
"Wow," Tracy said again.  She flipped back onto her stomach and stared down into the water.  "Maybe there's fish like that down there."
"No."
"It's really deep.  You can't see bottom."
"Believe me, Trace.  It's just a lot of gravel and old punky driftwood and insect casings."
"Yah, well how would you know?"
"Actually—" Lenie began.
"Dad said to keep looking."
"I bet your Dad says lots of things," Lenie said in a strange voice.  "Isn't that right?"
Tracy looked back at her.  Lenie wasn't smiling any more.  She looked very serious.
"I bet he touches you sometimes, doesn't he?"  Lenie was almost whispering.  "When the two of you double up, at night."
"Well, sure," said Tracy.  "Sometimes."
"And he probably said it was okay, right?"
Tracy was confused.  "He never talks about it.  He just does it."
"And it's your little secret, right?  You don't—you didn't talk about it with your Mom."
"I don't—" Mom— "He doesn't want me talking about—"  She couldn't finish.
"That's okay,"  Lenie smiled, and it was sad and friendly smile all at once.  "You're a good kid, you know that, Tracy?  You're a really good kid."
"She's the best," Tracy's Dad said, and Lenie's face went as blank as a mask.
He had filled up his big daypack and Tracy's little one.  Tracy scrambled up and got hers.  Her Dad was looking at Lenie, and he seemed a little bit puzzled but then he said, "We're going to check out an old animal trail back around the ridge.  Maybe see us a deer or a badger.  Few hours, anyway.  You're welcome to join us if you—"
Lenie shook her head stiffly.  "Thanks, no.  I think I'll just—"
And then she stopped, and looked at Tracy, and looked back at Tracy's Dad.
"Yeah, okay," she said.  "Maybe I should, at that."
BLIP
Health Warning
From:  MEMA Regional HazWatch, N'AmPac WH
Distribution:  All pacification and surveillance personnel, N'AmPac Refugee Strip 
Type: Deficiency sydrome
Scale: local
Rating: 4.6

Be advised that the local incidence of deficiency symptoms within the refugee population has increased between 46? and 47? N. Latitude.  Be on the watch for early symptoms such as hair loss, skin flaking, and shedding of fingernails; more advanced cases are developing massive bruising and symptoms of second-stage starvation (loss of >18% body mass, edema, incipient kwashiokr and scurvy).  Blindness, spasms, and full-blown diabetes have not yet been observed, but are expected to develop.
This appears to be a terminal condition, the cause of which remains undetermined.  Although the symptoms are consistent with advanced malnutrition, samples taken from local Calvin cyclers are nutritionally complete.  The cyclers are also producing the prescribed concentrations of SAM-g, but we have found less than half  the effective dosage in blood samples from some individuals.  BE AWARE THAT SOME REFUGEES MAY BE OFF THEIR MEDS, AND MAY THEREFORE BE UNCOOPERATIVE OR EVEN HOSTILE.
We suspect that something is interfering with metabolic processes at the cellular level and are currently running samples against the MEMA pathogen microarray.  So far, however, we have failed to isolate the agent.
IF YOU OBSERVE THESE OR ANY OTHER UNUSUAL SYMPTOMS WHILE ON PATROL, PLEASE INFORM THIS OFFICE IMMEDIATELY. 
WOMB
The lies drove Clarke into the water.
She'd sat around that foldaway table with Gord and Tracy, eating supper from the cycler.  It was a high-end model, and the bricks it laid were much tastier than the ones she'd eaten back on the Strip.  She'd concentrated on that small pleasure as Gord had run his fingers through his daughter's hair, made affectionate cooing daddy's-little-girl-sounds, each gesture containing—what?  Clarke knew the signs, she thought she knew the signs, but this fucker was damned good when there were witnesses around; she hadn't seen a single thing that proved what was lurking underneath.  He could've been any father, loving his daughter the right way.
Whatever that was.
His display, not to mention his incessant small talk, had driven her outside.  Gordon had seemed almost relieved when Clarke grabbed her knapsack and stepped into the night.  Now she stood looking down through a motionless tract of liquid glacier, deep and inviting and flooded with amplified moonlight.  Her eyecaps transmuted the surrounding forest to gunmetal and silver in high contrast.  Her reflection in the still water, once again, was…
…moving…
…and the same old bullshit started up again, as something in her brain began serving up another happy lie about loving parents and warm fuzzy childhood nights-- 
She was on her knees, tearing through her knapsack.
She got the hood on, felt the neck seal fuse against her tunic.  There were other accessories, of course, fins and sleeves and leggings, but there was no time—she was six years old and being tucked in and nothing bad was going to happen to her, nothing at all, by now she fucking knew it, and she wasn't going to put up with that shit any more, not so long as there was the ghost of a chance—
—it started when I came back up maybe if I go back down—
She didn't even take off her clothes.
The water hit her like an electrical shock.  Freezing and viscous, it flayed her bare arms and legs, fired icy needles along crotch and shoulders before the 'skin of her tunic clamped around her limbs to seal the breach.  The canister of vacuum in her chest sucked all her air away.  Welcome icewater surged through her chest.
She dropped like a stone.  Watery moonlight faded with each second; pressure amassed.   Her exposed limbs burned, then ached, then went dead.
Curled into a ball, she bumped down against the bottom.  Grit and rotten pine needles rose in a small cloud.
She couldn't feel her arms and legs; they'd be dying now, by degrees.  Their blood vessels had squeezed down the moment she'd hit the water, an autonomic self-sacrifice to keep body heat in the core.  No oxygen making it through those constricted avenues.  No warmth.  The edges of her body were freezing to death.  In a way, it was almost comforting.
She wondered how long she could push it.	
At least she'd gotten away from that fucking monster Gord.
If that's what he is.  How could I prove it, absolutely?  He could explain it all away, fathers are allowed to touch their children, after all…
But there was no such thing as absolute proof.  There was only proof beyond a reasonable doubt.  And Lenie Clarke, Lenie Clarke had been there.  She knew.
So did that little girl, Tracy.  She was up there alone.  With him.  
Someone should do something about that.
So what are you now:  judge, jury, executioner?
She thought about it a bit.
Who better?
She couldn't feel her legs.  But they still moved at her command.
ECLIPSE
"She's strange," Tracy said while they cleaned up at the sink.
Her Dad smiled.  "She's probably just hurting a lot, honey.  The quake hurt a lot of people, you know, and when you're in pain it's easy to be thoughtless.  She just needs some time alone, I bet.  You know, compared to some people we were actually pretty…"
He didn't finish.  That happened a lot now.
Lenie still hadn't come back at bedtime.  Tracy got into her PJs and climbed into bed with her Dad.  She lay on her side, with her back against his stomach.
"That's right, little Lima Bean." Dad cuddled her and stroked her hair.  "You go to sleep now.  Little Lima Bean."
It was dark in the cabin, and so quiet outside.  No wind to rustle Tracy off to sleep.  Moonbeams snuck in through the window and made a piece of the floor glow with soft silver light.  After a while her dad started snoring.  She liked the way he smelled.  Tracy's eyelids were getting heavy.   She closed her eyes to comfy slits, watching the moonbeams on the floor.  Almost like her "Nermal the Nematode" nightlight at home.
Home was where Mom had…
Where—
The nightlight dimmed.  Tracy opened her eyes.
Lenie was looking in through the window, blocking the moonbeams.  Her shadow ate up most of the light on the floor.  Her face was in shadow too; Tracy could only see her eyes, cold and pale and almost glowing a little, like snow.  Lenie didn't move for a long time.  She just stood there, outside, looking in.  
Looking at Tracy.   
Tracy didn't know how she knew that.  She didn't know how Lenie could look into the darkest corner of a dark cabin in the middle of the night and find her there, curled up against her dad, eyes wide and staring.  Lenie's eyes were covered.  Tracy wouldn't have been able to see which way they were looking even in broad daylight.
It didn't matter.  Tracy knew:  Lenie was looking right through the darkness.  Right at her.
"Daddy," she whispered, and her Dad mumbled something in his sleep and gave her a squeeze, but he didn't wake up.
"Daddy," she whispered, afraid to speak up.  Afraid to scream.
The moonbeams were back.
Across the cabin, the door opened without a sound.  Lenie stepped inside.  Even in the dark her outlines seemed too smooth, too dark.  It was like she'd taken off all her clothes and there was nothing but blackness underneath.
One of her hands was holding something.  The other went to her lips.
"Shhh," she said.
     MONSTER
The monster had Tracy in his clutches.  He thought he was safely hidden, curled up there in the dark with his victim, but Lenie Clarke could see him bright as an overcast day.  
She stepped softly across the cabin, leaving icewater footprints.  She'd donned the rest of her diveskin to cut the chill; a cleansing fire spread through her limbs,  hot blood burning its way back into frozen flesh.
She liked the feeling.
Tracy stared up from her father's embrace.  Her eyes were like saucers, imploring beacons full of fear and paralysis.
It's okay, little friend.  He doesn't get away with it any more.
First step…
Clarke leaned in close.
…free the hostage.
She ripped the covers away.  The monster opened his eyes, blinking stupidly against a darkness that had suddenly turned against him.  Tracy lay stock-still in her pyjamas, still too frightened to move.
PJ's, Clarke thought wryly.  Nice touch.  Obviously Gord was on his best behavior, with company present.
Present company wasn't fooled.
Quick as a snake, she took Tracy by the wrist.  Then the child was safe beside her, Clarke's free arm protectively around her shoulder.
Tracy howled.
"What the hell…"  The monster was reaching for the lightstick beside the cot.  Fine.  Let him have light enough to see the tables, turning...
The cabin flared, blinding her for a moment before her eyecaps adjusted.  Gordon was rising from the cot.  Clarke raised the billy.  "Don't you fucking move."
"Daddy!" Tracy cried. 
The monster spread his hands, placating, buying time.  "Lenie—listen, I don't know what you want—"
"Really?"  She'd never felt so strong in her whole life.  "I sure as shit know what you want."
He shook his head.  "Listen, just let Tracy go, okay?  Whatever it is, there's no need to involve her—"
Clarke stepped forward;  Tracy bumped along at her side, whimpering.  "No need to involve her?  It's a little late for that, asshole.  It's way too fucking late."
The monster stopped still for a second.  Then, slowly, as if in dawning awareness:  "What do you—do you think I—"
Clarke laughed.  "Good one."
"You don't think—"
Tracy pulled.  "Daddy, help!"
Clarke held on.  "It's okay, Tracy.  He can't hurt you."  
The monster took a step forward.  "It's okay, Lima-bean.  She just doesn't underst—"
"Shut up!  Shut the fuck up!"
He stepped back, hands up, palms front.  "Okay, okay—just don't—"
"I understand, asshole.  I understand way fucking better than you think."
"That's crazy, Lenie.  Just look at her, why don't you?  Is it me she's scared of?  Is she acting like she wants to be rescued?  Use your eyes!  What in God's name made you think—"
"You think I don't know?  You think I don't remember how it feels, when you don't know any better?  You think because you've brainwashed your own daughter into thinking this is normal that I'm going to—"
"I never touched her!"
Tracy twisted free and ran.  Clarke, off-balance, reached after her.
Suddenly Gordon was in the way.
"You goddamned psycho," he snarled, and hit her in the face.
Something cracked, deep at the base of her jaw.  She staggered.  Salty warmth flooded her mouth.  In a moment there'd be pain. 
But now there was only a sudden, paralysing fear, resurrected from the dawn of time.
No, she thought.  You're stronger than him.  You're stronger than he ever was, you don't have to put up with his vile shit one instant longer.  You're going to teach him a lesson he won't ever fucking forget just jam him in the belly and watch him expl—
"Lenie, no!"  Tracy cried.  Clarke glanced aside, distracted.
A mountain smashed against the side of her head.  Somehow the billy wasn't in her hand any more; it was following some crazy parabolic course through a world spinning uncontrollably sideways.  The rough wooden planking of the cabin floor drove splinters into Clarke's face.  Off in some unfathomably distant part of the world, a child was screaming Daddy…
"Daddy," Clarke mumbled through pulpy lips.  It had been so many years, but he was back at last.  And nothing had really changed after all.

#

It was my own damn fault, she thought dully.  I was just asking for it. 
If she could only have one moment to live again, she knew, she'd get it right.  She'd hang on the billy this time, she'd make him pay like that cop in West Bend I got him all right, his whole middle just a big cloud of chunky soup,  nothing left but a raw bleeding backbone holding two ends together and he's not gonna be throwing his weight around after that, what little weight there is left hahaha…
But that was then.  This was now, and a big rough hand on her shoulder was flipping her onto her back.  "You twisted piece of shit!" the monster roared. "You lay a hand on my daughter and I'll fucking kill you!"  He dragged her off the floor and slammed her against the wall.  His daughter was crying somewhere in the background, his own daughter but of course he didn't care about that he only wanted…
She squirmed and twisted and the next blow glanced off her shoulder and suddenly she was free, the open door was right in front of her and all that safe darkness on the other side, monsters can't see in the dark but I can—
Something tripped her and she went down again but she didn't stop, she just scuttled out the door like a crab with half its legs gone, while Daddy bellowed and crashed close on her heels.
Her hand, pushing off against the ground, touched something— 
The billy it flew all the way out here I've got it now I can show him—
—but she didn't.   She just grabbed it and ran, vomiting with fear and her own cowardice, she ran into a welcoming night where everything was bright silver and gray under the moon.  She ran to the lake and she didn't even remember to seal her face flap until the whole world was spray and icewater.
Straight down, clawing the water as though it too were an enemy.  It was mere moments before the bottom came into view, it was only a lake after all and it wasn’t deep enough, it wasn't far enough, Daddy would just stroll down to the shore and reach down with his hands…
She beat against the substrate. Waterlogged detritus billowed around her.  She attacked the rock for days, for years, while some distant part of her shook its head at her own stupidity.
Eventually she lost even the strength to panic.
      I can't stay here.
Her jaw felt stiff and swollen in its socket.
      I've got the edge in the dark, at least.  He won't leave the cabin before daybreak. 
Something smooth and artificial lay nearby, its outlines hazed by distance and resettled sediment.  The billy.  She must have dropped it when she sealed her hood.  She slipped it back into its sheath.
Not that it did me any good last time…
She pushed off the bottom.
There'd been an old topographic map tacked up on one wall of the cabin, she remembered.  It had shown other cabins dotted intermittently along some forestry patrol route.  Probably empty most of the time.  There was one up north along—what had it been called—Nigel Creek.  She could get away, she could leave the monster far behind
—and Tracy—
Oh, God.  Tracy.
She broke the surface.
Her knapsack lay on the shore where she'd left it.  The cabin loomed at the far end of the clearing, its door shut tight.  The lights were on inside;  curtains had been drawn on the window, but the glow leaking around them would be obvious even without eyecaps.
She crawled from the lake.  A dozen kinds of pain welcomed her return to gravity.  She ignored them, keeping her eyes on the window.  She was too far away to see the edge of the curtain pulling back, just enough to afford a view to some hidden eye.  She saw it anyway.
Tracy was in there.
Lenie Clarke had not rescued her.  Lenie Clarke had barely gotten away herself, and Tracy—Tracy still belonged to Gordon.
      Help her.
It had seemed so easy, before.  If only she hadn't lost the billy…
You've got it now.  It's right there on your leg. Help her, for God's sake…
Breath caught in her throat.  
You know what he does to her.  You know.  Help her…
She drew her knees to her chest and hugged them, but her shoulders wouldn't stop shaking.  Her sobs sounded far too loud in the silver clearing.   
From the shuttered, silent cabin there was no reaction at all.
Help her, you coward.  You worthless piece of shit.  Help her…
After a very long time she reached for her pack.  Then she got to her feet and walked away.
WARHORSE
For over a month Ken Lubin had been waiting to die.  He'd never lived so fully as he had in that time.
Prevailing winds had carved the island's facets into intricate frescoes, full of spires and fossilized honeycomb.  Gulls and cormorants roosted in alcoves of arched sandstone.  There were no eggs to be had—evidently the birds didn't breed in autumn—but meat, at least, was plentiful. Fresh water was no problem;  Lubin had only to slip into the ocean and awaken the desalinator in his chest.  The diveskin was still functional, if a bit tattered.  Its pores let distilled water past to sluice him clean, kept caustic salts at bay.  While bathing he supplemented his diet with crustaceans and seaweeds.  He was no biologist but his survival enhancements were cutting-edge; any natural toxin he couldn't taste, his employers had probably immunized him against.
He slept under a sky so full of stars they outblazed the light-haze leaking from the eastern horizon.  The very wildlife glowed at night.  He hadn't realized that at first; his eyecaps robbed him of darkness, turned night-time into colorless daylight.  One night he'd grown tired of that relentless clarity, pulled the caps from his corneas, and seen dim blue light radiating from a colony of harbor seals on the shoreline below.  
Most of the seals were festooned with tumors and abscesses.  Lubin didn't know whether this was a natural condition or just another consequence of living too close to the effluent of the twenty-first century.  He was pretty sure that sores weren't supposed to luminesce, though.  These did.  The growths oozed raw and red in broad daylight, but at night the ichor glowed like the photophores of deepwater fish.  And more than the tumors;  when the seals looked back at him, their very eyes shone sapphire.
A small part of Ken Lubin couldn't help but try and cobble together some sort of explanation:  bioluminescent bacteria, freshly mutated.  Lateral gene transfer from whatever microbes had lit St. Elmo's Fire, back before rampant ultraviolet had sent them packing.  Molecules of luciferin, fluorescing with exposure to oxygen:  that would account for the glow of open sores, the glow of eyes packed dense with capillaries.
A larger part of him simply marveled at the sheer absurdity of cancer made beautiful.

#

His body repaired itself faster than that of any normal man; tissues knitted and regrew almost like tumors themselves.  Lubin gave thanks for cells forcibly overcrowded with mitochondria, for trimeric antibodies, for macrophage and lymphokine and fibroblast production cranked up to twice the mammalian norm.   Sound returned to him within days, clear and beautiful at first, then fading as the proliferating cells of his eardrums—urged into overdrive by a dozen retroviral tweaks—just kept going.  By the time they'd remembered to quit, Lubin's eardrums felt as though they'd been built of chipboard.
He didn't resent it.  He could still hear, after a fashion, and even total deafness would have been a fair trade-off for a body made more resilient in other respects.  Nature had even provided him with an example of the alternative, should he grow ungrateful:  a sea lion, an old bull, that showed up on the south end of the island about a week after Lubin himself came ashore.  It was easily five times the size of the harbor seals that hauled out elsewhere, and it had led a life of greater violence; some recent battle had snapped its lower jaw off at the base.  The jaw hung like a vicious swollen tongue, studded with teeth.  Skin and muscle and ligaments were all that held it to the creature's head.  Those tissues swelled and festered with each passing day; ruptures would open in the skin, ooze white and orange fluids, knit together again as utterly natural defenses struggled to seal the breach.
Three hundred kilograms of predator, doomed in the prime of life.  Starvation or infection were its only options, and it didn't even have a choice over those.  As far as Lubin knew, deliberate suicide was a strictly human endeavor.
Most of the time it just lay there, breathing.  Every now and then the bull would return to the ocean for a few hours.  Lubin wondered what it could possibly be doing there.  Was it still trying to hunt?  Didn't it know it was dead already, were its instincts so completely inflexible?
And yet, for some reason Lubin felt a sense of kinship with the dying animal.  Sometimes both of them seemed to lose track of time.  The sun steered cautiously around the island on its descent into the western sea, and two tired and broken creatures—watching each other with endless, fatalistic patience—barely noticed when night fell.

#

After a while he began to think he might live.
It had been a month, and his only obvious symptom had been intermittent diarrhea.  He'd begun to find roundworms in his shit.   Not a pleasant discovery, but not exactly life-threatening either.  These days, some people even inflicted such infections on themselves deliberately.  Something about exercising the immune response.
Perhaps his reinforced immune system had kept him free of whatever had scared the GA into hot-zone mode.  Perhaps he'd simply been lucky.  It was even remotely possible that his analysis of the whole situation was wrong.  Until now he'd been resigned to terminal exile, an uneasy balance between an instinct for survival and the belief that his employers wouldn't approve of Ken Lubin spreading infectious apocalypse throughout the world.  But maybe there was no apocalypse, no infection.  Maybe he was safe.  
Maybe there was something else going on.
Maybe, he thought, I should find out what it is.
At night, looking east, he could sometimes see running lights twinkling near the horizon.  The route they followed was predictable, as stereotypic as an animal pacing within a cage:  kelp harvesters.   Low-slung robots that mowed the ocean.  No security to speak of, assuming you could get past those ventral rows of scissoring teeth.  Vulnerable to any sufficiently motivated hitchhikers who might find themselves stranded over the Pacific conshelf.
Guilt Trip poked him half-heartedly in the belly.  He was making assumptions, it whispered.  One asymptomatic month hardly proved a clean bill of health.  Countless maladies had longer incubation times.
And yet…
And yet there was no ironclad evidence of any infection here.  There was only a mystery, and an assumption that those in control wanted him out of the picture.  There'd been no orders, no directives.  Lubin's gut could wonder at what his masters intended, but it could not know—and not knowing, it left him to his own decisions.

#

The first of these was a mercy killing.
He'd seen ribs emerging from the flanks as the sea lion wasted over time.  He'd seen the fleshy hinge of the lower jaw seize up in tiny increments, swollen into position by massive infection and the chaotic regrowth of  twisted bone.  When he'd first laid eyes on the bull, its jaw had dangled.  Now it merely protruded, stiff and immobile, from a twisted bole of gangrenous flesh.  Lesions gaped along the body.
By now the old bull barely lifted its head from the shore; when it did, pain and exhaustion were evident in every movement.  One dull milky eye watched Lubin approach from the landward side.  There might have been recognition there, or merely indifference.
Lubin stopped a couple of meters from the animal, holding a length of driftwood as thick as his forearm, carefully splintered to a point at one end.  The stink was appalling.  Maggots squirmed in every sore.
Lubin laid the point of his weapon on the back of the animal's neck.
"Hi," he said softly, and jammed it home.
Amazingly, it still had strength to fight.   It reared up, roaring, caught Lubin in the chest with the side of its head, knocked him effortlessly into the air.  Black skin, stretched across the twisted ruin of the lower jaw, split on impact.  Pus sprayed from the breach.  The bull's roar slid across the scale from defiance to agony.
Lubin hit the shore rolling, came up safely outside the sealion's attack radius.  The animal had hooked its upper jaw around the shaft embedded in its neck, and was trying to dislodge it.  Lubin circled, came up from behind.   The bull saw him coming, wheeled clumsily like a battered tank.  Lubin feinted; the bull charged weakly to the left.  Lubin spun back, jumped, grabbed:  the wood sent splinters into his palms as he jammed it down with all of his weight.
The bull rolled screaming onto its back, pinning one of Lubin's legs under a body that—even at half its normal weight—could still crush a man.  A monstrous face, full of pain and infection, lunged at him like a battering ram.
He struck at the base of the jaw, felt bone tearing through flesh.  Some deep pocket of corruption burst in his face like a stinking geyser.
The battering ram was gone.  The weight shifted from his leg.  Thalidomide limbs flailed at the gravel by Lubin's face.
The next time he got the spear he hung on to it, pulled from side to side, felt the deep scrape of wood over bone.  The bull heaved and bucked beneath him; in a confusion of agony from so many sources, it didn't seem to know where its tormentor was.  Suddenly the point slid into a groove between cervical vertebrae.  Once more, with all the strength left to him, Lubin pushed.
Just like that, the heaving mass beneath him went limp.
It wasn't completely dead.  Its eye still followed him, dull and resigned as he circled the  animal's head.  He'd merely paralyzed it from the neck down, deprived it of breath and motion.  A diving mammal.  Adapted over how many millions of years to survive extended periods without breathing?  How long would it take that eye to stop moving?
He had an answer.  Sealions were like any other mammal in any number of ways.  They had that opening at the base of the skull, that place where the spinal cord climbed up into the brain.  The foramen magnum, it was called; such anatomical tidbits were always coming in handy to people in Lubin's line of work.
He pulled his weapon free of the flesh and repositioned it near the back of the skull.
The eye stopped moving about three seconds later.

#

He felt a brief stinging in his own eyes as he prepared to leave the island.  He felt a lump in his throat that couldn't quite be accounted for by the tightness of his diveskin.  The feeling was regret, he knew.  He had not wanted to do what he'd just done.
Nobody who encountered him was likely to believe that, of course.  He was, among other things, a murderer.  When called for.  People who learned that about Ken Lubin rarely tried to get to know him any better.
But in fact he had never wanted to kill anything in his life.  He regretted every death he had caused.  Even the death of some big, stupid, incompetent predator who hadn't been able to meet the standards of its own species.  There was never any choice in such matters, of course.  Those were the only times he ever did it; when there was no choice.
And when that was the case—when all other avenues had been exhausted, when the only way to get the job done was through a necessary death—surely there was nothing wrong with doing the job efficiently, and well.  Surely there was nothing wrong with even enjoying it a little.
It wasn't even his fault, he reflected as he waded into the surf.  He'd simply been programmed that way.  His masters had as much as admitted it themselves, when they'd sent him on sabbatical.
Back on shore, a hillock of decomposing flesh caught the corner of his eye.  There'd been no choice.  He had ended suffering.  One good deed, to pay back the place that had kept him alive these past weeks.
Goodbye, he thought.
Now he sealed his hood and tripped his implants.  His sinuses, bronchi, GI tract all writhed in brief confusion, then surrendered.  The Pacific sluiced through the tubes in his chest with reassuring familiarity; tiny sparks shocked bonded molecules oxygen and hydrogen apart, handed the useful bits off to his pulmonary vein.
He didn't know how long it would take him to reach that intermittent line of sparkles near the horizon.  He didn't know how long it would take them to carry him back to the mainland.  He didn't even know exactly what he'd do when he got there.  For the time being, knowing one thing was enough:
Ken Lubin—lover of all life, Guilt-Tripped assassin, cannon so loose that even Black Ops had been compelled to store him on the seabed like radioactive waste—
Ken Lubin was going home.
     
Physalia
ZEUS
Sou-Hon Perreault was closing on a riot when they shut her down. 
It was Amitav, of course.  She knew that the moment she saw the location of the disturbance: a Calvin Cycler in trouble at Grenville Point, less than two klicks from his last known position.  She jumped into the nearest botfly and rode it down.
Somehow the refs had uprooted a lightstand and used it as a battering ram;  the cycler had been skewered through the heart.  A dozen brands of amino goop oozed viscously from the wound, a pusy mix of ochres and browns.  Underweight refugees—some oozing blood from scabby sores— shouted and pushed against the front of the wounded machine, toppling it.  
The larger crowd on all sides drew back, rudderless and confused, as powerless as ever. 
"kholanA ApakA netra, behen chod!"
Amitav, climbing onto the fallen cycler.  Perreault's botfly parsed phonemes, settled on Hindi.
"Open your eyes, sisterfuckers!  Is it not bad enough you should eat their poison? Will you sit here with your hands up your asses while they send another wave to finish the job!  Lenie Clarke wasn't enough for you, yes? She survived the center of the storm itself, she told you who the enemy was!  She fights them while you sleep on the dirt!  What will it take to wake you up?"  
Amitav's disciples shouted ragged approval; the others milled and murmured among themselves.  Amitav, Perreault thought, you've crossed the line.
The stickman glanced skyward and threw up one spindly arm, pointing at Perreault's descending botfly.  "Look!  They send machines to tell us what to do!  They—"
Sudden darkness, silent and unrelieved.

#

She waited.  After a few seconds, two lines of luminous text began blinking against the void:
MEMA Containment Zone
(N'AmPac Biohazards Act, 2040)

She'd run into dark zones before, of course.  Some 'fly she was riding would drop suddenly into shadow, floating serenely blind and deaf for fifty meters or twenty klicks.  Then, safely out of insight's way, it would come back online. 
But why cite the Biohazards Act over a trashed cycler?
Unless it isn't about the cycler…
She linked into the next 'fly back in line:  MEMA Containment Zone  flashed against unwelcome darkness.  She relinked to one before that, and the one after, bouncing back and forth towards the edges of the blackout.
Eight point one eight kilometers from end to end. 
Now she was sighted and riding southbound, just beyond the northern perimeter.  She topped out the whole spectrum, stared through a tangle of  false-color infra and X and UV, poked into the fog with radar—
There—
Something in the sky.  A brief image, fading almost immediately to black.

MEMA Containment Zone…

She backjumped again, set her defaults to repeat the maneuver whenever visual went down.  She saw it again, and again:  A great curtain, darkness.  A billowing wall descending to earth, darkness.  An inflatable barrier, swelling smoothly across the width of the Strip.
Darkness.  MEMA Containment Z—
She considered.
They'd cut off eight kilometers of Strip, a segment nearly nine hundred meters wide.  It would take several dampers to cover that much area, assuming they were squelching tightbeam as well as broadband.  The dampers would probably be mounted on the wall itself. 
Chances were their coverage wouldn't extend out to sea very far.
A northbound 'fly had just emerged from eclipse.   Perreault mounted it and rode west off the path, keeping low.  Surf pounded close beneath; then she was past the breakers and cruising over a low oily swell.  She turned south.
There was traffic out here after all.  An assault chopper with ambiguous markings hovered threateningly over a pair of retreating pleasure boats, a damper dome disfiguring its hull like a tumor.   A smattering of botflies flitted closer to shore, of a different sort than Sou-Hon Perreault rode.   None of them took any notice of her; or if they did, they credited her 'fly with higher pedigree than it deserved.
She was eight hundred  meters offshore now, still skimming the swells.  Due west of Amitav's latest insurrection.  Perreault slowed her mount and came about, heading inland.
Breakers in the distance, a smear of muddy sand, a boil of motion further up the shore.  She cut the throttle and hovered, her senses still intact.
Mag:  motion resolved into melee.
Everyone was running.  Perreault had never seen such a high level of activity on the Strip before.  There was no net direction to the movement, no exodus.  Nowhere, apparently, to go.  Some of the strippers were splashing into the surf; the botflies she'd seen earlier were forcing them back.  Most were just going back and forth.
Something in the clouds was stabbing the mob with flashes of green light.
She panned up, almost missing it:  a fast-moving botfly disappearing to the south.  And now her own 'fly was bleating, something coming up behind, big and low-flying and stealthed—
Of course it's stealthed, or radar would have caught it sooner.
—and way too close to escape from now.
She spun the 'fly around and saw it coming not two hundred meters out:  a lifter headed for shore like a levitating whale.  She glimpsed rows of portholes along its belly, strange brassy things from another age, soft orange gas-light flickering behind the glass.  She squinted in her headset, tried to dispel the Victorian image.  Sudden electricity crackled from a knob on the airship's hull; blinding light flared and died in Perreault's eyes.  Alphanumerics persisted briefly in the darkness, the last gibbering cough of the 'fly's navigational system.  Then nothing but a flashing epitaph:
Link Down.  Link Down.  Link Down.
She barely noticed.  She didn't try to reconnect—by now the 'fly  was on its way to the bottom.   She didn't even jump to another channel.  She was too busy thinking about what she'd seen.  She was too busy imagining what she hadn't.
Not portholes after all.  The wide-bore muzzles of industrial flamethrowers.  Their pilot lights had flickered like hot tongues.
JIMINY CRICKET
Variations on a theme:
The Oregon Strip, shrouded in fog.  Evening's light was a diffuse and steely gray, not even a bright smudge on the horizon to suggest a sun.  Refugees accreted around the feeding stations, warding off the dampness by the soft orange glow of portable space-heaters.  Their apparent humanity faded with distance; the fog reduced them to silhouettes, to gray shadows, to vague hints of endless convection.  Motion that went nowhere.  They were silent and resigned.
Achilles Desjardins saw it all through the telemetry feeds.
He saw what happened next, too.  A soft whine, louder than the usual botflies, and higher up.  Turbulence in the human sea beneath it; faces suddenly upturned, trying to squeeze signal from gray chaos.  Rumors exchanged:  this happened before, three days south.  This was how it began.  We never heard from them again…  Murmurs of apprehension; some of the human particles began to jostle, some to run. 
Fear enough, finally, to break through the chemical placidity that had domesticated them for so long.
Not that it did any good.  The test zone had already been walled off.  No good panicking now, no avenue for sensible flight reflexes.  They'd only been alerted a few seconds ago and already it was nearly over.
Lancing down through the clouds, a precise turquoise stutter of laser light hemstitched its way down a transect ten kilometers long.  Tiny aliquots of  sand and flesh incinerated where it touched.  Droplets in the saturated air caught the beams in transit and turned them visible to human eyes:  threads of argon so brilliant and beautiful that even looking at them risked sheer perfect blindness.  They were fast, too; the light show was over before the cries of pain had even begun.
The principal was simple:  everything burns.  In fact, everything burns with its own distinct spectrum, subtle interplays of boron and sodium and carbon luminescing on their own  unique wavelengths, a harmony of light unique to any object cast into flame.   In theory, even the combustion of identical twins would generate different spectra, as long as they'd had different dietary preferences in life.
Present purposes, of course, didn't require nearly that much resolution.
Look here:  a strategic patch of real estate.  Is it enemy territory?  Draw a line through it, but make sure your transect extends into safe land at both ends.  Good.  Now, sample along the whole path.  Turn matter to energy.  Read the flames.  The ends of your transect are the baselines, the ground-truth zones; their light is the light of friendly soil.  Subtract those wavelengths from whatever you read in between.  Pour your numbers through the usual statistics to account for heterogeneities in the local environment.
Jovellanos had worked up a distance-spec mug shot of ?ehemoth from her sample slurries.  There was one sure way to tell if any given transect came up clean against that benchmark:  half an hour later, the space around it would not have been doused with halothane and burned to the bedrock.
The test was a little over ninety percent reliable.  The Powers That Be said that was good enough.

#

Even Achilles Desjardins, master of the minimum response time, marveled at how much had changed in a couple of months.
Word was leaking, of course.  Nothing consistent, and certainly nothing official.  Quarantines and diebacks and crop failures had been old news for years.  A day hardly went by without some bug or other making a comeback—tired old genes revitalized in a terrorist lab, or brought into new alliances by viral mediators with no respect for the reproductive isolation of species.   You could hide a lot of new outbreaks against a background that muddled.
But the mix was changing.  The twenty-first century had been a lush smorgasbord of calamities, epidemics and exotics and dust storms dogpiling onto humanity from all different directions.   Now, though, one particular threat seemed to be growing quietly under all the others.  Certain types of containment were happening more often.  Fires burned along the west coast, unconnected by any official commonality;  some were attributed to pest control, some to terrorism, some merely to N'aAm's ongoing desiccation.  But still:  so many fires, along the coast?  So many quarantines and purges that happened to run north-south along the Rockies?   Very strange, very strange.
Some dark entropic monoculture was growing beneath the wider riot of usual breakdowns, invisible but for the wake of its passing.  People were starting to notice.
Guilt Trip kept Desjardins' mouth shut for him, of course.  He wasn't assigned to ?ehemoth any more—he and Jovellanos had done their job, presented their results, and been sent back to field whatever random catastrophes the Router sent their way—but gut imperatives didn't change with job assignments.  So at the end of his shift he'd retire to the welcoming bowels of Pickering's Pile and get pleasantly buzzed and make nice with the locals—he even let Gwen talk him into trying real sex again, which even she admitted was a disaster—and listened to rumors of impending apocalypse.
And while he sat and did nothing, the world began to fill with black empty-eyed counterfeits.
It hadn't sunk in at first.  The first time he'd met Gwen she'd been dolled up like that; rifter chic, she'd called it.  She'd only been the first.  The trend had really taken off the past couple of months.  Now it seemed like everyone and their organcloner was getting into body stockings and photocollagen.  K's mostly, but the number of  posing r's was going up as well.  Desjardins had even seen a few people decked out in real reflex copolymer.  That stuff was almost alive.  It changed its own permeability to maintain optimum thermal and ionic gradients, it healed when torn.  It kind of slithered around you when you put it on, wriggling into the snuggest fit, seams and edges seeking each other out for bonding.  It was as though some pharm had crossed an amoeba with an oil slick.  He'd heard the stuff even bonded against eyes.
When he thought about it, he shuddered.  He didn't think about it often, though.  The sight of each new poseur twisted knives much keener than mere revulsion.
Six of them died, the knives whispered as they slid around in his gut.  Maybe they didn't have to.  Maybe it wasn't enough.  Either way, you know.  Six of them died, and now thousands  more, and you played a part in that Achilles my man.  You don't know if what you did was right or wrong, you don't even know what it was you did exactly, but you were involved, oh yes.  Some of that blood is on your hands.
It shouldn't have bothered him.  He'd done his job as he always had; Absolution was supposed to handle the aftershocks.  And besides, he hadn't made any actual decisions of life and death, had he?  He'd been given a task to do, a statistical problem really.  Number crunching.  He'd done it, he'd done it well, and now he was on to other things.
Just following orders, and what a shame about the Cree.
Except he wasn't following orders, not exactly.  He couldn't let it go.  He kept ?ehemoth at the edge of his vision, a little window down in one corner of tactical, open and running like a pixilated sore.  He picked at it during the lulls between other assignments;  satcam enhances, Bayesian probability contours, subtle blights and blatant fires dotting the west coast.
Moving east, now.
It moved sporadically, feinting, disappearing, resurfacing in entirely unexpected places.  One massive outbreak south of Mendocino died of natural causes overnight.  A tiny stronghold blossomed near South Bend and refused to vanish even after the Lasers of the Inquisition came calling.  Crops had begun mysteriously failing in the northwest;  fifty-odd hectares of Olympic Park forest had been burned to control a sudden bark beetle infestation.  Malnutrition was inexplicably on the rise in some well-fed corner of Oregon state.  Something new was racking up kills along the coast, and was proving almost impossible to pin down.  It had almost as many symptoms as victims; its diffuse pathology disappeared against a background of diseases with clearer focus.  Hardly anyone even seemed to notice.
?ehemoth's signature was starting to appear in fields and wetlands, further inland:  Agassiz.  Centralia.  Hope.  Sometimes it seemed to follow rivers, but upstream.  Sometimes it moved against the wind.  Sometimes the only thing that made any sense was that someone was carrying it around.  A vector.  Maybe more than one.
He passed that insight on to Rowan's address.  She didn't answer.  Doubtless she knew already.  And so Achilles Desjardins went from day to day, a tornado here, a red tide there, a tribal massacre some other place—everywhere the need for his own polymorphic bag of tricks.  No time to dwell on past accomplishments.  No time to dwell on that shape coming up from underneath, glimpsed on the fly between other crises.  Never mind, never mind; they know what they're doing, these people that drank your blood and changed it and enslaved you to the good of all mankind.  They know what they're doing.
And everywhere, people dressed for the deepest ocean stood around at bus stops and drink'n'drugs, like Banquo's fucking ghost cloned a thousand times over.  They exchanged eyeless glances and chuckles and spewed the usual desperate inanities. And spoke in overloud casual voices to drown out the strange frightening sounds drifting up from the basement.
FOOTPRINTS
Even dead, Ken Lubin had access to more resources than ninety-nine percent of the living.
It made perfect sense, considering his profession.  Identities are such transient things after all; height, weight, ethnoskeleton could all be changed by subtle tweaks of the body's endocrine system.   Eyeprints, voiceprints, fingerprints—developmental accidents, perhaps unique at birth but hardly immutable.  Even DNA could be fudged if you weighed it down with enough pseudocodons.  It was too easy for one person to imitate another, and too necessary to be able to change without losing access to vital resources.  Immutable identity wasn't just useless to Ken Lubin.  It was potentially life-threatening.  
For all he knew—he never bothered to keep track of such things—he'd never officially existed in the first place. 
It didn't matter who he was anyway.  Would you let a man through the door just because he'd had his pupils scanned the week before?  Anything could have happened since.  Maybe he's been deconstructed and turned.  Maybe he'd rather betray you than see his hostaged children executed.  Maybe he's found Allah.
For that matter, why keep a stranger at bay?  Is someone an enemy just because their eyeprints aren't on record?
It didn't matter whether Ken Lubin was who he claimed to be.  All that mattered was that whoever he was, his brain was spiked with so much Guilt Trip that it would be physiologically impossible for him to bite the hand that dosed him.
It wasn't the usual Trip that ran through his veins.  The Community had a thousand different flavors of choice; one for Venezuela, four or five for China, probably a couple dozen for Quebec.  None of them trusted any motivator as mealy-mouthed as the greater good.  Even those do-gooding 'lawbreakers weren't in service to that, no matter what their training brochures said.  The greater good could mean anything; hell, it could even mean the other guys.
Ken Lubin was chemically dedicated to the welfare of certain N'AmPac interests which dealt in the generation of electrical power.  Those interests had been of paramount importance ever since the Hydro War; they'd been fine-tuning the molecules for most of the twenty years since.  The moment Lubin even intended to sell his services to the wrong bidders, he'd court a seizure that would make grand mal look like a nervous itch on a blind date.  That was all the mechanical bloodhounds cared about when they sniffed his crotch.  Not his name, or his clothes, or the accumulated heavy-metal essence of ocean that still clung to him after an extended shower in the local community center.  Not any exaggerated rumors of his demise, or any unexplained return from the grave.  
All they cared about was that he was like them; loyal, obedient, trustworthy.  
They opened doors for him.  They gave him funds, and access to medbooths five years ahead of anything available on the street.  They gave him back his hearing and, surprisingly, a clean bill of health.  They pointed him to a vacant furnished room, waiting like a convenient cocoon to any on the home team who might need a place to crash on short notice.
Above all, they let him into Haven.

#

There were certain things they wouldn't do for anybody.  A hardline to his cocoon was out of the question, for instance.  Lubin had to go onsite for his research; an anonymous row of data booths embedded in the fourteenth floor of the Ridley Complex, off-limits to all but those of tailored conscience.  About half the booths were occupied at any given time, dark diffuse shapes twitching behind frosted glass like larvae nestled in honeycomb.  Occasionally two people would emerge into the hallway at the same time, pass each other without a word or a glance.  There was no need for reassuring pleasantries here; everyone was on the same side.
Inside the booth, headset curled snuggly around jaw and eyes and ears, Kenneth Lubin logged into Haven and mumbled subvocal questions about Channer Vent.  His headset read the buzz of his larynx—a bit of adjustment required, to compensate for the vocoder implanted in his throat—and sent off an agent to hunt for answers.  He asked to see a list of references containing the phrase Beebe Station, and was instantly indulged.  He cross-referenced those results against lists of dangerous microbes from the deep sea.  
No significant pathogens registered from Channer.
Hmm.
It didn't prove anything, of course.  There were lots of nasty facts that didn't make it into Haven.   There were other avenues of approach, though.
Assume, for example, that the vent had been nuked to contain some risk.  Beebe would never have gone online if that risk had been known beforehand; there had been some period, therefore, when the threat was spreading beneath anyone's radar.  And once the threat had been discovered, all those loose ends would have to be tied up in hindsight…
The building contractors.  Left Coast Shipyards.  They wouldn't use nukes though, not above-ground.  
Fire, probably.
He summoned forth a frequency plot of fires over time, within a five-kilometer radius of marine construction and contracting facilities along the N'AmPac coast.   Haven showed him a graph with a curious spike placed about three months after Beebe had been established:  Urchin Shipyards, Hanson Fabrication, and Showell Marine's SanFran complex had all hosted infernos within the space of a week.  A dozen other facilities had been hit by various acts of arson in the two weeks following, not to mention a couple of places that had burned off large chunks of their property as part of "ongoing renewal programs".
Lubin loosened the scale and ran the request again:  all large fires over time, anywhere along the N'AmPac coastline.
The map lit up.
Oh my, he thought.

#

Something had them scared to death.  And it had all started down at Beebe.
No Channer pathogens in the metabase, no nasty microscopic predators that ate your body from the inside out.  But macroscopic predators:  Channer'd had those in abundance.  Viperfish and anglerfish and seadragons, oh my.  Black toothy monsters, some studded with bioluminescent running lights, some blind as mud, some that changed sex on a whim, still others whose flesh bristled with the embedded bodies of parasitic mates.   Nasty, hideous things.  They were everywhere in the ocean's middle depths, and they'd have been scary indeed if they'd ever grown to more than a few centimeters in length.
At Channer, they had.  Something had drawn those little nightmares down deeper than they went anywhere else, turned them into ravenous giants big as people.  You didn't go outside Beebe without a gas billy strapped to your leg; you rarely came back in without having used it. 
Something at Channer had created monsters.  Lubin sent a message into Haven asking what it was.
Haven wasn't exactly sure.  But there was a tech report in the gray lit that took a guess:  some kind of endosymbiotic infection that increased growth energy.  The phrase infectious neomitochondria popped up in the discussion.  
The authors of the report—a couple of eggs out of Rand/Washington University—suggested that some microbe at Channer could infect cells symbiotically, providing extra growth energy to the host cell in exchange for room and board.  Whatever the bug was, they claimed it would have some fairly obvious characteristics.  Small enough to fit inside a aukaryotic cell, high assimilation efficiency for inorganic sulphur, that sort of thing.
So.  An infection that caused giantism in fish.  Again, hmmm.
One of the first things Lubin had done after coming ashore had been to check himself out for pathogens.  He'd tested clean.  But this Channer thing was new, and strictly speaking, not even a disease.  It might not show up on the standard slate.
Lubin's credit was good.  More extensive blood work wouldn't be an issue.
There were other issues, though.  One of them dawned gradually as he explored, betrayed itself in the way Haven answered his questions.  Sometimes the metabase thought for a moment or two before telling him what he wanted to know.  That was normal.  But other times—other times, it spat an answer back almost before he'd asked the question.  Almost as though it had already been thinking along those very lines, as though it didn't have to go and look up the relevant facts.
Maybe, Lubin reflected, that was exactly it.
Haven's agents were not nearly so pressed for resources as the engines that combed Maelstrom; they could afford to cache recent searches.  Very few lines of enquiry were utterly unique.  If someone asked about the price of a Parkinson's fix today, chances were someone else would want to know something similar tomorrow.  Haven's search engines held onto their executive summaries, the better to speed responses to related enquiries.
Ask and it shall be given:
—After a mean of 2.3 seconds when answering questions about giantism in deepwater fish;
—after a mean of  3 seconds when talking about benthic sulfur-reducing microbes;
—about a second for queries containing the phrase "Channer Vent";
—0.5 seconds for searches combining sulfur-reducing microbes with fire.
Fire.  Benthic sulfur-reducing microbes.  An odd combination of terms.  What relevance could fire have to life on the bottom of the ocean?
He added a third concept, almost on a whim:  shipyard.
0.1 seconds.
Well.
He was following in someone's footsteps.   Someone had been in Haven before him, asking the same questions, making the same connections.   Searching for answers, or looking for loose ends.  
Those footsteps belonged either to an explorer or an instigator.  Ken Lubin resolved to find out which. 
AN ARCHETYPE OF DISLOCATION
There had been a time when Sou-Hon Perreault had truly loved her husband.  Martin had projected a serenity in those days, a gentleness and an unwillingness to judge that made her feel safe.  He'd been unfailingly supportive when she needed it (hardly ever, before the breakdown); he'd never been afraid to look at both sides of any issue.  For love, he could balance on the edge of any fence.
Even now, he'd forever hold her and whisper inane reassurances.  Things couldn't be that bad, he'd say.  Quarantines and dark zones always popped up here and there, not without good reason.  Sometimes restrictions were necessary for the good of everyone, she knew that—and besides, he had it on good authority that there were safeguards even on those who made the Big Decisions.  As if he was privy to some grand secret, as if Maelstrom wasn't rotten with threads and rumors about the corpses and their mind-controlling drugs.
Her caring, supportive husband.  Sitting across the table, his face overflowed with loving concern.  She hated the sight of him.
"You should eat," he said.  He put a forkful of mashed  Spirulina into his mouth and chewed, demonstrating.
"Should I?" she said. 
"You're losing weight," Martin told her.  "I know you're upset—goodness, you've got every reason to be—but starving yourself won't make you feel any better."
"That's your solution to the world's problems?  Stuff your face so we'll all feel better?"
"Sou—"
"That's right, Marty.  Just eat a bit more and everything'll be just grand. Suck up all those cheery threads from N'AmWire and maybe they'll lull you right into forgetting about Crys…"
It was a low blow—Martin's sister lived in Corvallis, which had not only been quarantined since the Big One but had dropped completely offline for the better part of a month.   The official story involved unfortunate long-term aftershocks that kept taking out the land-lines; N'AmWire pictures showed the usual collage of citizens, shaken but not stirred, gamely withstanding temporary isolation.  Martin hadn't been able to get through to Crys for three weeks now.
Her words should have stung him—even provoked him to anger—but he only sat there looking helpless, his hands spread.  "Sou, you've been through so much  these past few months of course things look really grim.  But I honestly think you're putting way too much weight on a bunch of rumors.  Riots, and firestorms, and—I mean, half those postings don't even show up with address headers any more, you can't trust anything that comes out of Maelstrom these days—"
"You'd rather trust N'AmWire?  They don't spit out a word without some corpse chewing it for them first!"
"But what do you know, Sou?  What have you actually seen with your own eyes?  By your own admission you just got a glimpse of one big ship moving inland, and you didn't even see it do anything—"
"Because it shot the 'fly right out from under me!"
"And you weren't supposed to be there in the first place, you idiot! You're lucky they didn't track you down and cancel your contract on the spot!"
He fell silent.  The burble of the aquarium in the next room suddenly seemed very loud.
He was backpedaling the next instant:  "Oh Sou, I'm sorry.  I didn't mean to…"
"Doesn't matter."  Sou-Hon shook her head, waving off the overture.  "We're done here anyway."
"Sou…"
She stood up from the table.  "You could do with a bit of a diet yourself, hubby.  Lose some weight, clear your mind.  It might even make you wonder what they're putting in that so-called food you keep trying to force down my throat."
"Oh, Sou.  Surely you're not saying—"
She went into her office and closed the door.

#

I want to do something!
She leaned back against the door and closed her eyes.  Martin, safely excluded, made soft shuffling noises on the other side and faded away.
I've been a voyeur my whole fucking life!  All I do is watch!  Everything's falling apart in bits and pieces and now they're bringing in their big guns and laying waste and I'm part of it and there's nothing I can do...
She summoned a curse for the faulty derm she'd worn into Hongcouver.  The epithet was an empty and colorless thing; even now, she couldn't truly regret having been slapped awake.  She could only rage at the things she'd seen when her eyes had opened.
And Martin's trying so hard to be a comfort, he's so earnest and he probably believes that things really will get better if I go back to being a haploid sheep like him…
She clenched her fists, savored the pain of fingernails in the flesh of her palms.  Lenie Clarke's no sheep, she thought.
Clarke had long since left the Strip, for all Amitav's efforts to keep her spirit alive.  But she was still out there, somewhere.  She had to be.  How else to explain the subtle proliferation of black uniforms and empty eyes in the world?  Perreault didn't get out much but the signs were there, even the predigested pap that N'Amwire served up.  Dark shapes on street-corners.  Eyes without pupils, staring from the crowds that always gathered in the background of newsworthy events.  
That was nothing new, of course.   N'AmPac's divers had been all over the news, almost a year before; first lauded as saviors of the new economy, fashionable icons of cutting-edge reserve.  Then pitied and feared, once the rumors of abuse and psychopathy reached some threshold of public awareness.  Then inevitably, forgotten. 
Just an old fad.  Rifter chic had already had its day.  So why this sudden new life, breathed into some dusty blip on the rear-view mirror?  Why the fine mycelium of innuendo threading its way through Maelstrom, whispers about someone risen from the deep sea, pregnant with apocalypse?  Why the fragmentary rumors, their address headers corrupted or missing, of people taking sides? 
Perreault opened her eyes.   Her headset rested on its peg, just in front of her desk.  An LED blinked on its side:  message waiting.
Someone wanting to trade shifts, maybe.  Some supervisor wanting to pay her overtime to keep looking the other way.
Maybe another trashed cycler, she thought hopefully.  Probably not, though.  The Strip had been a much quieter place since Amitav's corner of it had been—excised…
She took a deep breath, one step forward, sat.  She slipped on the headset: 

Souhon/Amitav (LNU) 
lucked into this avenging angel.  No shit.  Lenie Clarke, her name was.

Oh my God.
The text had been overlayed directly onto the default tactical map for the botflies on the Strip.  Sou-Hon forced herself to sit quietly, and shoveled dirt back into the tiny pit opening in her stomach.
You're back.  Whoever you are.
What do you want?
She hadn't made any secret of her interest in Amitav or Lenie Clarke.  There'd been no need, at first; both had been legitimate topics of professional conversation, albeit apparently uninteresting ones to other 'flyers.  But she'd kept quiet since Amitav had fallen into eclipse.  Just barely.  A big part of her had wanted to scream that atrocity into Maelstrom at full voice; afraid of repercussions, she'd settled for screaming at Martin, and hoped that whatever had shot down her 'botfly hadn't bothered tracking it to source.
This wasn't MEMA or the GA, though.  This almost looked like a glitch of some kind.  
Another line of text appeared beneath the first two:

She's like some kinda amphibian, one of those rifter cyborgs.

No obvious channel to link in to, no icon to tap.  Behind the text, the familiar long chain of red pinpoints patrolled the Pacific coastline, showing no hint of the places where they went into coma.

 Les beus are looking for her, but I bet fifty QueBucks they don't even know what she looks like under all that rifter gear.  Souhon or Amitav (LNU)?

Perhaps whoever it was had hacked into her headset mic as well. "I'm—Sou-Hon. Hyphenated."

Sou-Hon.

"Yes."

You know Lenie Clarke.

"I—saw her, once."

Good enough. 

An invisible fist closed around Sou-Hon Perreault and threw her halfway around the world. 

#

Pacific coastlines and tactical overlays, gone in an instant; a cul-de-sac of brick and machinery suddenly in their place.  Gusts of sleet, slashing an atmosphere colder than the Strip had ever seen.  It rattled off glass and metal to either side.  The stylized greyhounds etched into those  surfaces didn't stir. 
Not all the flesh had disappeared, Perreault saw.  A woman stood directly ahead, her back to a brick wall the color of raw meat.  The buses on either side were plugged into sockets extending from that wall, cutting off escape to either side.  If there was any way out it was straight ahead, through the center of  Sou-Hon Perreault's perceptual sphere.   But that sphere showed a target framed within luminous crosshairs.  Unfamiliar icons flashed to each side, options like ARM and STUN and LTHL.
Perreault was riding some kind of arsenal, and she was aiming it right at Lenie Clarke.
The rifter had gone native.  Civilian clothes covered the body, a visor hid that glacial stare, and Perreault would never have recognized her if she'd had to rely on merely human eyes.  But botflies looked out across a wider spectrum.  This one saw a garish and distracting place, emissions bleeding from a dozen EM sources—but Clarke was close-range and line-of-sight, and there was no wiring in the wall directly behind her. Against that relative shadow, her thorax flickered like a riot of dim fireflies.
"I'm not going to hurt you,"  Perreault said.  Weapons icons flashed accusingly at the corner of her eye; she found a dimmer one that whispered DSRM, and hit it.  The arsenal stood down.
Clarke didn't move, didn't speak.
"I'm not—my name's Sou-Hon.  I'm not with the police, I'm—I think—"  She spared a glance at GPS:  Calgary.  The Glenmore intercity shuttle nexus.
Something had just thrown her thirteen hundred kilometers to the northeast.
"I was sent," she finished.   "I don't know, I think—to help..."  She heard the absurdity in every word. 
"Help."  A flat voice, betraying nothing.
"Hang on a moment…" Perreault lifted the 'fly above the Greyhounds, did a quick three-sixty.  She was floating over a docking bay where buses slept and suckled in rows.  The main terminal loomed forty meters away,  elevated loading platforms extending from its sides.  Two buses were presently onloading; the animated greyhounds on their sides raced nowhere, as if running on invisible treadmills.   
And there, by the decontamination stalls: a small seething knot of confusion. An aftermath.  Perreault accessed the 'fly's black box, quick-scanned the previous few minutes.  Suddenly, in comical fast-forward, she was closing on a younger disturbance.  Even at this stage the show had been winding down, people turning away.  But there was Lenie Clarke, holding an ebony shockprod.   There was a man with his arms raised against her,  a wide-eyed little girl hiding behind his legs. 
Perreault slowed the flow.  The man took a step back in realtime.
"Lady, I've never even seen you before…"
Clarke stepped forward, but some former aggression was draining from her stance.  Uncertainty took its place. "I—I thought you—"
"Seriously, lady.  You are one fucked-up little chimera…"
"You alright, kid?" The wand in one hand wavered.  The other hand extended, tentatively.  "I didn't meant to sc—"
"Go away!"  the child howled.
The father glanced up, distracted by overhead motion.  "You want to pick a fight?"  he snarled at the mermaid.  "Pick on that!"—pointing straight at the approaching 'fly.
She had run.  The  drone had followed, armed and hungry.
And now—somehow—Sou-Hon Perreault had been placed in possession.
Perreault dropped back down between the buses.  "You're safe for the moment.  You—"
The cul-de-sac was empty.
She one-eightied the 'fly; something flickered out of sight around a corner.
"Wait! You don't understand—"  
Perreault cranked the throttle.  For a moment nothing happened.  Then her whole perceptual field lurched, right down to the semicircular canals.  A readout flickered upper-right, then held steady:  RECONNECT.
Weapons icons bloomed like pulsing tumors.  Somewhere in the distant realm of her own flesh, Perreault hammered frantic arpeggios against remote controls.  Nothing worked.
"Run!" she cried as the link went down.
But she was back in Montana again, and her voice didn't carry.  
400 MEGABYTES:  PUNCTUATED EQUILIBRIUM 
400 Megs hovers on a knife's-edge of complacency.
For thousands of generations it has known the secret of success in Maelstrom.  Predators have pursued it with powerful legs and gnashing teeth; competitors have raced it to each new refuge, each new patch of forage; diseases have striven to eat it from the inside.  And yet 128 begat 142, and 142 begat 137 (a bit of pruning there, getting rid of redundant code), and 137 began 150, and so on, and so on, up unto the present crisis-laden instant. All because of a very special secret encoded in the genes:
You want to get around fast in Maelstrom, the name you drop is Lenie Clarke.
400 doesn't know why this should be.  That's not really the point.  What it does know is, that particular string of characters gets you in anywhere.  You can leap from Node to Node as though disinfectants and firewalls and shark-repellants did not exist.  You can pass undamaged through the vicious fleshy meatgrinder that is a head cheese, a passage guaranteed to reduce you to instant static without the protective amulet of Lenie Clarke in your pocket.  Even Haven—mythic, inaccessible Haven, a vast smorgasbord virtually untouched by the appetites of the living—may someday be within reach.
Problem is, too many others are getting into the act.
It's not an uncommon development in Maelstrom; evolution happens so quickly, in so many different directions, that you can't go half a second without a bunch of wannabes rediscovering the wheel you thought you had all to yourself.  By now the free rides to open fields are growing crowded.  Binary beasts of burden each labor under the weight of dozens of hitchhikers, each grabbing up their own little aliquots of memory, each slowing the procession a tiny bit further.  Now the carrier files themselves are attracting attention—from checksum monitors who just know in their gut that no casual e-mail should weigh in at a hundred gigs, to sharks hungry for prey almost too fat to move.
Want to spread your seed through Maelstrom?  Hitch your wagon to Lenie Clarke.  Want to be shark food?   Do the same thing.
It's not everybody's problem, though.  Some creatures leap around as fast as they ever did.  Faster, even.  Something they know, maybe.  Or someone.   400Megs has never been able to figure out the secret.
It's about to, though.
400 Megs is currently inbreeding with a middling sib whose lineage only diverged a few hundred generations ago.  Almost all the genes are the same, which doesn't promote a lot of diversity but at least reinforces the tried-and-true.   Both parties have a few dozen copies of Lenie Clarke, for instance, which they exchange with mindless redundancy.
But no gene is an island, even in Maelstrom.  There's no such thing as an independent locus.  Each travels linked to others, little constellations of related traits, junk code, happenstance association.  And as 400Megs is about to find out, it isn't just Lenie Clarke that matters.  It's also the company she keeps.
      All the bits are lining up to be counted.  Replication subroutines march down the line like messenger-RNA, ready to cut and paste.  Chance shuffles the cards, orgasm squirts them hence, and 400Megs injects Lenie Clarke into its cousin.  Strings like  vampire and Beebe and ?ehemoth go along for the ride.
      And in return, following the usual hermaphrodite credo of tit-for-tat,  400Megs gets Lenie Clarke with a whole different circle of friends.  Like doomsday.  Like meltdown.  Like bestservedcold.
      By all appearances, just another unremarkable fuck.  But afterwards, things start to change for 400Megs.
      Suddenly it's replication rate is going through the roof.  And where before its progeny languished and withered in backwater caches, now Maelstrom itself scoops them up and copies them a thousand times over.  One fine cycle a N'AmPac security sieve finds several such prodgies drifting north off the coast of the GA.  Recognizing them as high-priority communications, it shunts them directly to the nearest smart gel.  The gel scans the relevant embedded bits and sends copies into Haven for secure storage.
All of a sudden, the most powerful forces in Maelstrom want to give members of The 400 Club anything they want.  The Club doesn't question their good fortune; they merely exploit it. 
They are no longer 400 Megs, hitchhiker.  
       What they are is John the fucking Baptist.  
MICROSTAR
He'd been out of circulation too long.  He was losing his edge.  How else to explain an ambush at the hands of three glassy-eyed children on the back streets of Santa Cruz?
Of course, Lubin had had a lot on his mind.  He was coming to terms with some very disturbing test results.  He'd been pursuing them for days now, rejecting each new clean bill of health, running increasingly specific tests for increasingly implausible maladies, and now, finally, there it was: something in his blood that neither nature nor N'AmPac had put there.
Something strangely backwards.  
More than sufficient to distract any normal man, perhaps.  No excuse for someone who'd once transplanted a micronuke from his own gut to the heart of the Trois-Rivieres switching station, without benefit of anesthesia.  No excuse for Ken Lubin.
It was inexcusable.  His assailants barely even qualified as punks;  ranging in age from perhaps sixteen to twenty, pumped on some sort of neurotrope, evidently convinced that their transderm steroids and corneal caps and shockprods made them invulnerable.   Sometime during Lubin's Pacific tour, the rifter template had become fashionable among drybacks.   It was probably the eyes more than anything.  Back on the seabed eyecaps had hidden a multitude of sins, kept fear and weakness and hatred safely hidden behind masks of blank indifference.   Down there the caps had provided cover, imposed enough protective distance for weak people to become strong, given time.
Up here, though, they only seemed to make weak people stupid.
They wanted money, or something.  He wasn't really paying attention.  He didn't even bother warning them off.  They didn't seem in the mood to listen.
Five seconds later they weren't in the mood to do anything but run.  Lubin—having foreseen this on some level long since relegated to subconsciousness—had deprived them of the use of their legs.   He felt a token, distracted reluctance at the necessary next step; they had, after all, seen more of his abilities than good security would dictate.  It had been his own damn fault—if he hadn't been so careless he'd have avoided the situation altogether—but the damage was done, now.  Loose ends were  fraying, and had to be cut.
There were no witnesses.  The children had chosen wisely in that regard at least.  There were no screams, only quiet gasps for breath and the soft pop of dislocating vertebrae.  No ineffective pleas for mercy.  Only one of them even tried to speak, perhaps emboldened by the realization that somehow—incredibly, in the space of barely a minute—she had reached the point of having nothing left to lose.
"Mange de la marde, enculé," she croaked as Lubin reached down.  "Who the fuck died and made you Lenie Clarke?"
Lubin blinked.  "What?"
The child spat blood in his face and stared defiantly back with featureless white eyes.
Well, Lubin thought,  Maybe there would've been hope for you after all. And twisted.
 
#

It was a bit disturbing, of course.  He'd had no idea that Lenie Clarke was famous.
He asked the matchmakers for references to Lenie Clarke.  Maelstrom hiccoughed and advised him to narrow his search criteria:  there were over fifty million hits.
Oh my, he thought, and started exploring. 
Lenie Clarke was an anarchist.  Lenie Clarke was a liberator.  Lenie Clarke was a fashion symbol.  Lenie Clarke was an avenging angel, resurrected from the ocean depths to tear down the system that had abused and victimized her.  Lenie Clarke had followers; mostly in N'AmPac so far, but the word was spreading.  Hordes of disaffected, powerless people had found someone to relate to, a fellow victim with impervious eyes who had learned to fight back.  Against what, exactly, there was no consensus.  With whose army, not a whisper.  Lenie Clarke was a mermaid.  Lenie Clarke was a myth.
Lenie Clarke is dead, Lubin reminded himself.  None of the references he could find would confirm that fact.  
Perhaps she'd made it after all.  The GA had promised a shuttle to evacuate Beebe.  Lubin had assumed—along with everyone else—that they'd been lying.  Clarke had been the only one to stay behind and find out.
Maybe all of them made it.  Maybe something happened, after I got separated…
He entered separate queries:  Alice Nakata, Michael Brander—Judy Caraco,  just to be thorough.  Maelstrom knew of many by those names, but none seemed to have the cachet of Lenie Clarke.  He fed the same list through Haven; the results were smoother, the data much higher in quality, but the bottom line remained unchanged.
Just Lenie Clarke.  Something with that name was infecting the world.
"Lenie Clarke is alive," said a voice in his ear.
He recognized it:  one of the generic disembodied Matchmakers that came out of Haven in answer to user questions.  Lubin glanced across his display, puzzled.  He hadn't entered any queries.
"It is almost certain," the voice continued, distant and inflectionless.  Almost as though it were talking to itself.  "Lenie Clarke lives.  Temperature and salinity are well within acceptable ranges."
It paused.
"You are Kenneth Lubin.  You are alive as well."
He disconnected.

#

Anonymity.  That was the whole point of the exercise.
Lubin knew the specs on Ridley, and on similar facilities distributed invisibly throughout the world.  They didn't scan eyes or faces.  They didn't care who they let in—they only cared that entrants could do no harm.  Everyone was equal within the frosted glass tubes of the fourteenth floor.  Everyone was no one.
Yet someone in Haven had called him by name.
He left Santa Cruz.
There was another secure gateway at the Packard Tower, in Monterey.  This time Lubin wasn't taking any chances:  he linked to his terminal through three separate watches connected in series, each scrambled on a different seed.  He restarted a search on Lenie Clarke, carefully following different query trees  than he had the first time.
"Lenie Clarke is on the move," a far-off voice mused.
Lubin started a trace.
"Kenneth Lubin has been sighted in Sevastopol," the voice remarked.  "Recent reports have also placed it in Whitehorse and Philadelphia sometime within the past eighty-four hours.  Lenie and Lubin are on the comeback trail.  Are you a fan of alliteration?"
This is very strange, he thought.
"We looking out for Kenny and Lenie," the voice continued.  "We intent on translocating and disseminating both parties into novel environments with acceptable salinity range varies directly with temperature, within the environments considered.  Do you relate to rhyme?"
It's a neural net, he realized.  A Turing App.  Maybe a gel.  Whatever was talking to him, it wasn't programmed:  it had learned to speak through trial-and-error, had worked out its own rules of grammar and syntax.  Lubin had seen such devices—or organisms, or whatever they were—demonstrated.  They picked up the rules easily enough, but they always seemed to throw in a few stylistic quirks of their own.  It was hard to track down exactly how that happened.  The logic evolved, synapse by synapse.  It was opaque to conventional analysis.
"No," he said, experimentally.  "For one, I don't relate to rhyme. Although that's not true all the time."
A brief silence.   Then:  "Excellent.  I would've paid, you know?"
"Mediocre at best.  What are you?"
"I am telling you about Lenie and Kenny.  You don't want to fuck with them, friend.  You wanna know what side you're on, right?"
"Tell me, then."
Nothing.
"Hello?"
Nothing.  To make things worse, his trace failed—return address blocked at source.
He waited for a good five minutes in case the voice started talking again.  It didn't.  Lubin disconnected from his terminal, logged in on a different one further along the row.  This time he left Lenie Clarke and Ken Lubin strictly alone.  Instead he stored the results of his worrisome blood tests in an open file, tagged to certain keywords that would hopefully attract attention from the right sources.  Someone out there was paralleling his investigation; it was time to lure them in.
He logged off, distracted by an obvious and uncomfortable coincidence:
A smart gel had been running the nuke that vaporized Beebe Station.
MATCHMAKER
Prions: 				OK

Viruses:  	Adeno		OK
Arbo		OK
		Arena		OK
		Filo		ben
		Morbilli		chron/asymp
Orbi		OK
		Paramyx	chron/asymp
		Parvo		OK
Picorna		OK
Hanta		resid
		Retro		resid
		Rota		light

Bacteria:	Bacillus		heavy/norm
		Coccus		norm
		Myco/Spiro	STD mod
		Chlam		OK


Fungi:				not crit

Protozoa:			not crit

Nematode:			OK

Platyhelminth			OK

Cestode				OK

Arthropod			OK


Cleared for Travel.


"Are you sure?  No—no ergots, or psychoactives?"

Cleared for travel.  Please proceed to check-in.

"Are you equipped for NMR?"
 
This booth is designed to scan for communicable parasites and diseases.  You may visit a commercial medbooth if you wish to be tested for other disorders.

"Where's the nearest commercial medbooth, then?"

Please don't leave me.

"I—what?"

Stay, Lenie.  We can work it out.
Besides.  There's someone you should meet.

The screen went dark.  The bead in her ear emitted a tiny belch of static. 
"It's me," said a sudden voice.  "Sou-Hon.  From the bus station."
She grabbed her visor and fled into the tame green jungle of  Concourse D.  Startled pedestrian eyes, barely noticed, met her own.  She slid the visor onto her face, not slowing. 
"You don't understand."  The voice was a small pleading thing in her ear.  "I'm on your side.  I'm—"
Glass doors, leading outside.  Clarke pushed through.  Sudden icy wind reduced global warming to a weak abstraction.  The concourse arced around from behind her like a horseshoe-shaped canyon.
"I'm here to help—"
Clarke tapped her watch twice in succession.  "Command mode," the device replied.
"Off" she told it.
"Amitav's de—" 
"Off," the watch acknowledged, and fell instantly asleep.
She was alone.
The sidewalk was empty.  Light spilled from the warren of habitrail tubes that shielded McCall's patrons from winter.  The whine of distant turbines drifted down from the rooftops.
Two taps.  "On."
A soft fuzz of static from her earpiece, although her watch was well within the operational two-meter radius.
"Are you there?" she said.
"Yes."
"What about Amitav?"
"Just before it—I mean—"  The voice caught on itself.  "They just burned everything.  Everyone.  He must have been..."
 A passing gust of wind snapped at her face. The mermaid took a bitterly cold breath.
"I'm sorry," the stranger whispered in her head.
Clarke turned and went back inside.
HEAT DEATH
It was an impoverished display, sparse informatics against a dark background:  lats and longs,  a tiny GPS overlay centered on Calgary International Airport, a  no-visual icon blinking the obvious at two-second intervals. 
"How do you know?"  breathed a disembodied voice in Perreault's ear.
"I saw it.  The start of it, anyway."  Hard-edged airport ambience echoed in the background.  "I'm sorry."
"It was his own fault," Clarke said after a moment.   "He made too much noise.  He was just—asking for it..."
"I don't think that was it,"  Perreault said.  "They slagged eight whole kilometers." 
"What?"
"Some kind of biohazard, I think.  Amitav just got—caught in the sweep…"" 
"No."  Words so soft they were almost static.  "Can't be."
"I'm sorry."
No visual.  No visual.
"Who are you?"  Clarke asked at last.
"I ride botflies," Perreault said.  "Mop-ups, mainly.  I saw you when you came out of the ocean.  I saw how you affected the people on the Strip, I saw you when you had one of those—visions—"
"Aren't you the faithful little stalker," Clarke said.
"That wasn't me," she continued after a while.  "Back on the Strip.  That was Amitav."
"He ran with it.  You were the insp—"
"It wasn't me."
"Okay.  Fine."
No visual.
"Why are you following me?" Clarke said. 
"Someone's—linked us up.  And at the bus station, earlier."
"Who?"
"I don't know.  Probably one of your friends."
Something between a cough and a laugh.  "I don't think so."
Perreault took a breath.  "You're—getting known, you know.  People are noticing.  Some of them must be protecting you."
"From what, exactly?"
"I don't know.  Maybe from the people who started the Quake."
"What do you know about that?"  The voice almost pounced down the link.
"Millions died,"  Perreault said.  "You know why.   That makes you dangerous to all the wrong people." 
"Is that what you think."
"It's one of the rumors.  I don't know."
"Don't know much, do you?"
"I—"
"You don't know who I am.  You don't know what I want or what I've d—  you don't know who they are or what they want.  You just sit there and let them use you."
"What do you want?"
"None of your fucking business."
Perreault shook her head.  "I'm just trying to help, you know."
"Lady, I don't know if you even exist.  For all I know that kid in South Bend is playing some kind of sick joke."
"Something's happening because of you.  Something real.  You can check the threads yourself if you don't believe me.  You're some kind of catalyst.  Whether you know it or not."
"And here you are, jumping in with no questions asked."
"I've got questions."
"No answers, then.  I could be planting bombs.  I could be spit-roasting babies.  You don't know, but here you are with your tongue hanging out anyway."
"Listen," Perreault snapped, "Whatever you're doing, it—"  
—Can't be any worse than the way things are already…
She stopped, astonished at the thought, grateful that she'd kept it back.  She felt an absurd certainly that seven hundred kilometers away, Lenie Clarke was smiling.  
She tried again.  "Look, I may not know what's going on but I know something is, and it revolves around you.  And I bet that not everyone who knows that is on your side.  Maybe you think I'm a head case.  Fine.  But even I wouldn't risk going through airport security with the kind of profile your implants put out.  I'd get out now, and I'd forget about flying anywhere for the foreseeable future.   There are other ways to get around."
She waited.  Tactical constellations glimmered about her.
"Okay," Clarke said at last.  "Thanks for the tip.  Here's one for you.  Stop trying to help me.  Help whoever's trying to stamp me out, if you can find them."
"For God's sake, why?"
"For your own sake, Suzie.  For everyone you ever cared about.  Amitav was—he didn't deserve what happened to him."
"No, of course he didn't."
"Eight kilometers, you said?"
"Yes.  Burned to bedrock."
"I think that was just the beginning,"  Clarke said.  "Off."
Around Sou-Hon Perreault, the stars went out.
BLIND DATE
      Interested?  Reply.
It was an odd sort of caption to find on a biochemical graphic:  a lopsided crucifix of Carbons and Oxygens and Hydrogens—oh wait, there was a Sulphur over there, and a Nitrogen on one side of the crossbeam, right about where they'd nail Jesus' wrist into place (of course, the way this thing was built, the savior's left arm would have to be about twice as long as his right).  Methionine, the matchmaker said.  An amino acid.
Only flipped.  A mirror image.
Interested?  Fucking right.  
The file had been sitting in his morning ?ehemoth-related data sweep, ticking quietly.  He hadn't even had time to check it out until several hours into his shift.  Supercol was burning a path through Glasgow, and some new carbon-eating bug—mutant or construct, nobody knew—had eaten a big chunk of the Bicentennial Causeway right out from under a few thousand rapitrans passengers.  It had been a busy morning.  But finally he'd had a few moments to come down off the accelerants and breathe.
He'd opened the file, and it had jumped out as if spring-loaded.
The matchmaker was unusually forthcoming in explaining why this file qualified for his attention.  Usually, matchmakers delivered their treasures through logical chains way too twisted for humans to follow; like magic, needed information from all over the world would simply appear in your queue, unsummoned.  But this file—this had come with explicit search terms attached, terms that even a human being could understand.  Quarantine.  Firestorm.  Beebe Station.  Channer Vent.
Interested?
Not enough information to be useful.  Just enough to catch the attention of someone like him.  Not data at all, really:  bait.
      Reply.

#

"Thanks for dropping in."  Canned voice, no graphic.
Desjardins flipped his own voice filter on.  "Got your message.  What can I do for you?"
"We have a mutual interest in biochemistry," the voice said pleasantly.  "I have information you might find useful.  The reverse may also be true."
"And who are you, exactly?"
"I'm someone who shares your interest in biochemistry, and who has information you might find useful."
"Actually," Desjardins remarked, "you’re a secretarial app.  Pretty basic one, too."
Nothing disagreed.
"Okay then.  Pocket whatever you've got and tag it the same way you tagged your invite.  I'll pick it up on my next sweep and get back to you."
"Sorry," said the app.  "That doesn't work from this end."
Of course not.  "So what would work for you?"
"I'd like to meet."
"Fine.  Name a time, I'll clear a channel."
"Face-to-face."
"Well, as I—you mean in person?"
"Yes."
"What for?"
"I'm suspicious by nature.  I don't trust digital images.  I can be at your location within forty-eight hours."
"Do you know my location?"
"No."
"You know, if I wasn't also suspicious by nature, I sure as shit would be now," Desjardins said.
"Then an interest in biochemistry is not all we have in common." 
Desjardins hated it when apps did that—threw in little asides and lame witticisms to appear more human.  Of course, Desjardins hated it when people did that, too.
"If you'd like to choose a place and time we could meet," the app told him, "I'll be sure to show up."
"How do you know I'm not quarantined?"  For that matter, how do I know you're not?  What am I getting into here?
"That won't be a problem."
"What are you really?  Some kind of loyalty test Rowan's siccing on me?"
"I don't understand."
"Because it's really not necessary.  A corpse of all people should know that."  Whoever the app was negotiating for had to be corpse-level at least, to be so confident about travel clearances.  Unless the whole thing was some kind of pointless and elaborate put-on.
"I'm not administering a loyalty test," the app replied.  "I'm asking for a date."
"Okay, then.  Pickering's Pile.  Drink'n'drug in Sudbury, Ontario.  Wednesday, 1930."
"That will be fine.  How will I know you?"
"Not so fast.  I think I'd rather approach you."
"That would be a problem."
"That is a problem.  If you think I'm going to amble innocently into the clutches of someone who won't even give me their name, you're sadly in need of a patch."
 "I'm sorry to hear that.  However, it doesn't matter.  We can still meet."
"Not if neither of us knows how to tag the other, we can't."
"I'll see you on Wednesday," the app told him.  "Goodbye."
"Wait a second…"
No answer.
Oh, man.  Someone was going to meet him on Wednesday.  Someone who evidently could drop down onto any place under geosynch at a moment's notice.  Someone who knew of a link between Channer Vent and ?ehemoth.  Someone who seemed to think they could find him without any identifiers at all.  
They were going to meet him whether he wanted to or not.
Achilles Desjardins found that a little bit ominous.
NECROSIS
There were places in the world that lived on the arteries between here and there; whatever they generated within wasn’t self-sustaining.  When tourniqueted—a quarantine, a poisoned water table, the sheer indifference of citizens abandoning some industrial lost-cause—they withered and turned gangrenous.
Sometimes, eventually, the walls would come down.  The quarantine would end or atrophy.  Gates would open, or just rust away.   But by then it was too late; the tissue was long since necrotic.  No new blood flowed into the dead zone.  Maybe a few intermittent flickers along underground cables, peripheral nerves where Maelstrom jumped the gap.  Maybe a few people who hadn't gotten out in time, still alive; others arriving, not so much seeking this place as avoiding some other.
Lenie Clarke was in such a place now, a town full of wreckage and smashed windows and hollow eyes staring from buildings nobody had bothered to condemn.  Whatever life was here did not, for the most part, take any notice of her passing.  She avoided the obvious territorial boundaries:  the toothless skulls of children significantly arranged along a particular curb; a half-mummified corpse, crucified upside-down beneath the cryptic phrase St. Peter the Unworthy;  derelict vehicles that just happened to block this road or that—rusty barricades, herding the unwary towards some central slaughterhouse like fish in a weir.
Two days before she'd skirted a coven of do-gooders who'd been live-trapping derelicts as though they were field mice, forcibly injecting them with some kind of gene cocktail.  Xanthoplast recipes, probably.  Since then, she’d managed to avoid seeing anyone.    She moved only at night, when her marvelous eyes gave her every advantage.  She steered clear of the local headquarters and territorial checkpoints with their burning oil drums and their light poles and their corroded, semi-functional Ballard stacks.  There were traps and hidden guard posts, manned by wannabes eager to make their way up the local hierarchy; they seeped slight infrared, or slivers of light invisible to mere meat.  Lenie Clarke noted them a block away and changed course, their attendants never the wiser.
 She was almost through the zone when someone stepped from a doorway ten meters ahead of her; a mongrel with dominant Latino genes, skin the color of slate in the washed-out light boosted through her eyecaps.  Bare feet, shreds of sprayed-on plastic peeling from the soles.  A firearm of some kind in one hand; two fingers missing.  The other hand had been transformed into an improvised prosthetic, wrapped round and round in layers of duct tape studded with broken glass and rusty nails.
He looked directly at her with eyes that shone as white and empty as her own.
"Well," Clarke said after a moment.
His clubbed limb gestured roughly at the surrounding territory.  "Not much, but mine." His voice was hoarse with old diseases.  "There's a toll."
"I'll go back the way I came."
"No you won't.”
She casually tapped a finger against her wristwatch. She kept her voice low, almost subvocal:  "Shadow."
"Funds transferred," the device replied.
Clarke sighed and sloughed off her pack.  One corner of her mouth curled the slightest fraction.
"So how do you want me?" she asked.
  
#

He wanted her from behind, and he wanted her face in the dirt.  He wanted to call her Bitch and cunt and stumpfuck.  He wanted to cut her with his homebuilt mace.
She wondered if this could be called rape.  She hadn't been offered a choice.  Then again, she hadn't exactly said no, either.
He hit her when he came, backhanded her head against the ground with his gun hand, but the gesture had an air of formality about it.  He was only going through the motions.  Finally he rolled off of her and stood.
She allowed herself back inside then, let the distant observation of her own flesh revert again to first-hand experience.  "So."  She  rolled onto her back, wiping the street from her mouth with the back of one hand.  "How was I?"
He grunted and turned his attention to her pack.  
"Nothing you want in there," she said.
"Uh huh."  Something caught his eye anyway.  He reached in and pulled out a tunic of black shimmering fabric.
It squirmed in his hand.
"Shit!" He dropped it onto the ground.  It lay there, inert.  Playing dead.
"What the fuck…" he looked at Clarke.
"Party clothes," she said, getting to her feet.  "Wouldn't fit you."
"Bullshit," the mongrel said.  "It's that reflex copolymer stuff.  Like Lenny Clarke wears."
She blinked.  "What did you say?"
"Leonard Clarke.  Deep Sea Gillman.  Did the quake."  He nudged the diveskin with one gnarled toe.  "You think I don't know?"  He raised his gun-hand to his face; the barrel touched the corner of an eyecap.  "How you think I got these, eh?  Not the first groupie in town."
"Leonard Clarke?"
"I said already.  You deaf, or stupid?"
"I just let you rape me, asshole.  So probably stupid."
The mongrel looked at her for an endless moment.
"You done this before," he said at last.
"More times than you can count."
"Get to maybe like it after a while?"
"No."
"You didn't fight."
"Yeah?  How many do, with a gun to their heads?"
"You're not even scared."
"I'm too fucking tired.  You gonna let me go, or kill me, or what?  Anything but listening to more of this shit."
The mongrel took a hulking step forward.  Lenie Clarke only snorted.
"Go," the mongrel said in a strange voice.  Then added, absurdly:  "Where you headed?"
She arched an eyebrow.  "East."
He shook his head.  "Never get through.  Big quarantine.  Goes halfway down to the Dust Belt."  He pointed south, down a side street.  "Better go 'round."
Clarke tapped her watch.  "It's not listed."
"Then don't. Fuck lot I care."
Keeping her eyes up, Clarke bent down and picked up her tunic.  The mongrel held her pack out by the straps, glancing down into its depths.
He tensed.
Her hand lunged into the pack like a striking snake, snatched out the billy.  She held it underhand, pointed at his gut.
He stepped back, one hand still gripping the pack.  His eyes narrowed to opalescent slits.  "Why didn't you use it?"
"Didn't want to waste a charge.  You're not worth it."
He eyed the empty sheath on her leg.  "Why not keep it there?  Where you can get it?"
"Now, if you'd had a kid with you…"
They regarded each other through eyes that saw everything in black and white.
"You let me."  The mongrel shook his head; the contradiction almost seemed painful.  "You had that, and you let me anyway."
"My pack,"  Clarke said.
"You—set me up."  Dawning anger in that voice, and thick wonder.
"Maybe I just like it rough."
"You're contagious.  You're a bughumper."
She wiggled the baton.  "Give me my things and maybe you'll live long enough to find out."
"You stumpfuck."  But he held out the pack.
For the first time she saw the webbing between the three stumpy digits of his hand, noticed the smooth  scarless tips of the stubs.  Not violence, then.  No street-fight amputation.  Born to it.
"You a pharm baby?" she asked.  Maybe he was older than he looked; the Pharms hadn't deliberately spread buggy genotypes for decades.   Sure, defectives spent more than healthy people on fixes, but the global ambience was twisting babies into strange enough shapes on its own by then.  Without the risk of consumer backlash.
"You are, aren't you?"
He glared at her, shaking with helpless fury. 
"Good," she said, grabbing her pack.  "Serves you fucking right."
SNARE
The voice in Lubin's ear had lied.
He hadn't been outside N'AmPac since landfall.  He hadn't  been in Sevastopol or Philadelphia for years.  He'd never been in Whitehorse, and from what he knew of the place he hoped he never would be.
But he could have been.  The lie was plausible one, to someone who knew Lubin but not his current circumstances.  Or maybe it hadn't been a deliberate lie.  Maybe it had been a flawed guess, based on God knew what irrelevant stats.  Maybe it had just been a bunch of random words shoveled together with more regard for grammar than veracity.
He wondered if he might have started the rumor himself.  Before he left for Sudbury, he put that hypothesis to the test.
He logged back into Haven and began a new name search:  Judy Caraco, Lenie Clarke, Alice Nakata, and Kenneth Lubin.
It was a different voice that accosted him this time.  It spoke in soft, gentle tones, almost whispering.  It showed no predilection for alliteration or nonsense rhyme.  It tended to mispronounce hard consonants.
It called him Michael.

#

He suborbed to Toromilton, took a shuttle north from that city-state.  Endless suburbs kept pace beneath him, spilling far from the megapolitan hub that had once kept them captive.  The daily commute had ended decades before, and still the blight was spreading.  The outside world passed uneventfully—there were only a few restricted zones in all of Ontario, and none were on his route.
The world inside was a bit more interesting.  Deep in the seething chaos that was Maelstrom, rumors of Mike Brander's resurrection were beginning to sprout alongside tales of Lubin's own.  Mike Brander had been seen in Los Angeles.  Mike Brander had been seen in Lima.
Lubin frowned, a small expression of self-disgust.  He'd given himself away with his own questions.  Something in Haven had taken notice when he'd run searches on all Beebe crew members except himself.  And why doesn't this user ask about Lubin, K.?  Because this user must already know about Lubin, K.
Because this user is Lubin, K.
      Lenie and Kenny are on the comeback trail.
His last troll through Haven, asking about everyone except Mike Brander, had provoked the same attention and the same simple logic.  Now Mike Brander was alive and well and living in Maelstrom.  QED.
What's doing this?  Why?
Why didn't always enter into it, of course.  Sometimes Maelstrom's wildlife would just grab onto popular threads to get around—steal keywords to blend in, sneak through filters by posing as part of the herd.  Classic bandwagon effect, blind and stupid as evolution itself.  That was why such strategies always fizzled after a while.  The fad-of-the-moment would fade into obscurity, leaving poseurs with forged tickets to an empty ballroom.  Or the gate-keepers would catch on; the more popular the disguise, the greater the incentive for countermeasures.  
Wildlife would hitch a ride on existing rumors, if they were hot enough.  Lubin had never heard of them starting rumors of their own before.
And why Lenie Clarke?  An obscure life, an invisible death.  Hardly the most contagious meme in the wires.  Nothing to inspire any post-mortem legacy at all, in fact.
This was something new.  Whatever it was, it was goal-directed, and it was using Lenie Clarke.
More than that.  Now, it was using him.

#

Sudbury had arrived DOA in the twenty-first century.  Decades of mining and a substrate of thin, poorly-buffered soil had seen to that.  The Sudbury stacks had been the epicenter for one of the first really big acid blights in North American history.  It was a benchmark of sorts.  
Not that this was entirely a bad thing.  Legend had it that lunar astronauts had once practiced in its scoured gray environs.  And the area's lakes were truly beautiful, clear and blue and lifeless as chemically-treated toilet bowls.  The substrate was relentlessly stable, planed and leveled by long-vanished glaciers; the west coast could fall into the ocean but the Canadian Shield would last forever.   Exotic alien lifeforms would disembark from tankers or lifters at the Industrial Horseshoe around Lake Ontario, wreak local havoc as they always had, but you'd have to be one tough chimera to get past the acid-washed outskirts of Sudbury Ontario.  Its dead zone was like a moat, a firebreak burned into the countryside by a hundred years worth of industrial poison.
It couldn't have suited MEMA better if it had been planned.  Here was a place resistant to the calamities that threatened the rest of the world, by virtue of having already lost anything of real value.   The real estate was cheap, too; the nickel mine was long exhausted, and there'd been a vacuum in the local economy since the last of the fuel rods had been buried over in Copper Cliff.
The Entropy Patrol had filled that vacuum.  The Sudbury office was one of the hemisphere's top ten.  
It was no surprise to Ken Lubin that his quarry was stationed here.  That mysterious searcher hadn't seemed to know the specifics of what he or she was after; the caches left behind in Haven had jumped fastest when queried on ecological impacts and sheer correlative epidemiology, slowest when asked about subcellular organelles or biochemical pathways.  Not the spoor of someone following an intimately-known agent.  More likely someone tracking a new and mysterious one.
Not a pharm, then.  Someone with a more ecological perspective, and with—given their access to Haven—a great deal of clearance and autonomy.  The Entropy Patrol had the only talent pool that fit.
 One good thing about the Patrol was, it was appropriately paranoid on matters of access.  In a world dominated by the telecommute, 'lawbreakers dutifully made the daily real-world journey to a single vast, secure catacomb that plugged directly into Haven.  Nobody would have been stupid enough to try and manage an entropy outbreak from a home terminal, even if it had been possible.  At MEMA, even the links into Maelstrom were insanely secure.
Which made tracking down employees quite straightforward.  They all had to come through the foyer.
There was no listing of individual 'lawbreakers, of course.   There was a listing of department heads, available through a small orchard of help kiosks in the main lobby.  Once Lubin had what he needed, he stepped outside and headed to the nearest Rapitrans stop.
 
#

Donald Lertzman was the archetypal middleman;  his career had coasted to that comfortable plateau above those who actually did productive work, but safely short of a position where he had to make any vital decisions.  Perhaps, on some level, he'd realized this.  Perhaps a fully-detached house, hidden behind a hedgerow of acid-resistant blue spruce at the edge of the Sudbury Burn, was his way of compensating.  
Of course, in this day and age he could hardly commute in his private vehicle.  He knew the value of appearances; he'd built his livelihood on nothing else.  Each night, therefore, he traversed the three blocks between his property and the nearest bus stop on foot.  Approximately twenty percent of this distance was out of public view.
"Excuse me, are you Donald Lertzman?"
"Yes,  who—"
Lubin carefully noted the medic alert plug-in on Lertzman's wristwatch.  It would raise the alarm if his vitals showed any indication of ongoing distress.  Of course, a body's stress responses don't just kick in by themselves—they have to be activated by the perception of threat or injury.  Most of those signals run through the spinal cord.
Ten minutes after failing to introduce himself, Lubin knew who he was looking for; he knew where to find him; he knew when that person's shift ended.  He knew more than he needed, for the moment.
His scheduled meeting at Pickering's Pile was twenty-six hours away.  Lubin didn't know if he wanted to wait that long.  For that matter, there was no guarantee that this Achilles Desjardins would even show up.
He left Donald Lertzman breathing peacefully.
COMPLICITY
It was every bit as abrupt, this time:  the sudden translocation of place, one world annihilated, another created in its stead.  There may have been some warning—a barely perceptible stutter in the feeds, a ping, as if something far away was checking for activity on the line.  But it came too fast to serve as any kind of heads-up, even if Perreault hadn't simply imagined it.
It didn't matter.  She was waiting.  She'd been waiting for days.
The same God's-eye view:  a different multitude spread out below, framed by familiar icons and overlays.  She'd been shunted from one botfly to another.  Nav and GPS were dark for some reason.
But she was indoors, and there was violence.
One man lay twisted on the concrete floor; another's boot caught him in the stomach as she watched.  His body folded weakly around the blow in some impotent fetal reflex, smearing blood and teeth in its wake.  The face was too torn and bloody to betray any clear ethnicity. 
The assailant—smaller, black, his back to the camera—shifted his weight from side to side with a terrible restless energy.  His arena was defined by the crowd that enclosed it: some intent, some indifferent, some shaking their own fists in frenzied enthusiasm.  Further away the concentration of humanity thinned out, gave way to sleeping mats and forgotten piles of personal belongings.
Perreault spun through the available menus.  No weapons.  In the corner of her eye, a flashing distraction:  target -162?az : -41?dec
Behind her.
The victor circled, still bobbing.  His face came into view, creased in a fury of concentration.  His foot lashed out again: a kidney blow to the back.  The twitching thing on the floor jerked open like a bloody flower.  Its back arched as though electrocuted.
The attacker looked up, straight at Perreault's hijacked botfly.  His eyes were the brilliant, crystalline jade of gengineered chlorophyll.  They stared from that black face like a hallucination.
Without taking his eyes off the 'fly, he delivered one last kick at the head of his victim.  Then he moved into the crowd, unopposed.
Sou-Hon Perreault had never seen him before.  She didn't know his victim.  But target was at -175?az : -40?dec, and moving.
Pan left.  More people, more sleeping mats.  Grey unfinished walls rising in the distance, lined with vending machines and, higher up, official pictographs directing the populace to registration and quarantine and latest bulletins.  They were in a cement cave ten meters high, erected in the name of mass subsistence:  a place for quarantines,  an innoculation center, a shelter against those sudden bouts of weather too vicious for the ad-hoc retrofits slapped onto older houses.  Increasingly, to many, home.
The unofficial term was Bomb Shelter.
Target was at -35?, 39?.  Tactical laid crosshairs onto her the moment she passed into view.  Same civilian disguise, same visor.  But something had happened to Lenie Clarke since Calgary.  She favored one leg when she walked.  A yellow bruise spilled across the right side of her face.
Perreault tripped the 'fly's speaker, thought twice, shut it off again.  No need to draw unnecessary attention.  Instead she brought up the comm menu, got a lock on Clarke's visor and tapped into the RF.
"Hi.  It's Sou-Hon again."
Down on the floor, Lenie Clarke froze.  She brought her wrist up; she was no longer wearing a watch.
"Up here," Perreault said  "In the botfly."
A proximity alert bleeped in her face: another 'fly coming into range.  Perreault spun, caught it arriving through the 'fly-sized catflap two meters over the main entrance.
Even in visible light, the weapons muzzles were obvious.
She looked back down. Clarke was gone. Perreault panned until the crosshairs came up again.  The rifter was heading for the door, glancing up at the other 'fly.  It didn't notice her; it was headed towards the bloody Rorschach blot at the other end of the cave.
"Not that one," Perreault said.  "Me.  The little one, the surveil—"
"You're the stalker, right?" Clarke broke in.
"The—yeah.  That's what you called me, anyway."
"Bye."  She was at the entrance.
"Wait!"
Gone.
Perreault spared another look at the other botfly.  It was hovering over the aftermath of the fight, its cameras pointing straight down.  It had probably been summoned by the 'fly Perreault was riding, just before she'd grabbed the keys.  It wasn't paying any attention to her.  If its rider even knew that Perreault was in command, he or she didn't seem to care.
Nothing much I can do either way, she thought, and dove through the flytrap.

#

Thin dirty rain, sparse droplets blown sideways. The sky was brown.  The air seemed full of grit.  Further south, then.  Some place where it probably hadn't really snowed in years.
A metropolitan skyline hovered behind the dome like a murky histogram.  Four-lane blacktop stretched out from that background, bled a puddle of asphalt beside the shelter, and continued to the horizon.  On all sides a threadbare weave of  smaller roads—some little more than dirt paths—extended through a patchwork of fields and woodlots.  
Target, pinned and highlighted like a luminous butterfly, was moving away along one of them.
Still no GPS.  Even the compass was offline.
Perreault reacquired the rifter's visor and set off on her trail.  "Listen, I can—" 
"Fuck off.  Last time you were in one of those things it ended up shooting at me."
"That wasn't me!  The link went down!"
"Yeah?"  Clarke didn't look back. "And what's going to keep it up this time?"
"This 'fly doesn't have any weapons.  It's strictly eyes and ears."
"I don't like eyes and ears."
"It couldn't hurt to have an extra set on your side.  If I'd been around to do some advance scouting before, maybe you wouldn't have that bruise on your face."
Clarke stopped.  Perreault brought the 'fly down and hovered a couple of meters off her shoulder.
"And when your friends get bored?" the rifter asked.  "When the link goes down again?"
"I don't know.  Maybe the 'fly just goes back to its regular rounds.  At least it can't shoot at you."
"It can talk to things that can."
"Look,  I'll keep my distance," Perreault offered. "A couple hundred meters, say.  I'll stay in range of your visor, but if this thing comes to its senses you'll just be some nameless K who happened to be around when the link came back.  They won't look twice."
Two meters off the port bow, Clarke's shoulders raised and fell.
"Why are you doing this?" she asked.  "Why is it so important to help me out?"
Perreault briefly considered telling the truth.  "I don't know," she said at last.  "It just is." 
The rifter shook her head.  After a moment she said, "I'm headed south."
"South?"  Perreault tapped again at the dead compass icon.  Nothing.  She tried to get a fix on the sun through murky overcast.
Clarke began walking.  "This way," she said.  And still didn't look back.

#

Perreault kept well off the road, paralleling Clarke's direction of travel.  She called up the camera menu—planning to set a zoom reflex on any motion not consistent with wind action—and was surprised to be offered a choice of views.  The 'fly had lateral, stern, and ventral cams as well as the primary stereos up front.  She could split the display into four windows and keep simultaneous watch on the whole three-sixty.
Lenie Clarke trudged silently along the road, shoulders hunched against the wind.  Her windbreaker flapped against her body like torn plastic.
"Aren't you cold?" Perreault asked.
"Got my skin on."
"Your—"  Of course.  Her dive suit.  "Is this how you always get around?"
"You were the one that warned me off flying."
"Well, yes, but—"
"I bus sometimes," Clarke said.  "Hitchhike."
Things that didn't involve ID checks or body scans.  There was an irony buried in there, Perreault reflected.  Clarke had probably been through more rigorous security in the past few weeks than would have been imaginable just decades earlier—but modern checks and gauntlets were aimed at pathogens, not people.  Who cared about artifacts like personal ID any more?  Who cared about anything so arbitrary as a political border?  National identity was so irrelevant that nobody'd even bothered to dismantle it.
"You're not going to find a ride on this road any time soon,"  Perreault remarked.  "You should've stuck with the main drag."
"I like walking alone.  Avoids pointless small-talk."
She took the hint.
She accessed the botfly's flight recorder, fearful of just how much incriminating information the device had stored.  But its entire memory had been purged—an act of sabotage well beyond Perreault's capabilities.  Even now, the black box somehow failed to retain the routine data stream the 'fly's sensors were sending it.  
She was relieved, but not particularly surprised.
"Still there?"  Clarke said.
"Uh huh.  Link's still up."
"They're getting better with practice."
Perreault remembered Clarke's reflexive glance at her bare wrist, back in the dome.  "What happened to your watch?"
"Smashed it."
"Why?"
"Your friends figured out how to override the off switch."
"They're not—" Not friends.  Not even contacts.  She didn’t know what they were.
"And now you're getting in through my visor.  If I had any brains I'd lose that too."
"So others have made contact?"  Of course they had—why would Sou-Hon Perreault be the only person in the world to be given an audience with the Meltdown Madonna? 
"Oh, right.  I forgot," the mermaid said wryly.  "You don't know anything."
"Have they?  Others like me?"
"Worse,"  Clarke said, and kept walking.
Don't push it.
A stand of skeletal birch separated them for a few minutes.   The port camera caught Lenie Clarke in fragments, through a vertical jumble of white slashes. 
"I went into Maelstrom,"  she said.  "People are—talking about me."
"Yeah.  I know."
"Do you believe it?  The stuff they're saying?"
Perreault tried for a light touch, not believing it herself:  "So you're not carrying the end of the world around inside you?" 
"If I am," Clarke said, "It doesn't show up on a blood panel."
"You can't believe most of the stuff you read in Maelstrom anyway," Perreault said.  "Half of it contradicts the other half."
"It's all just crazy.  I don't know how it got started."  A few seconds of silence.  Then:  "I saw someone that looked like me the other day."
"I told you.  You've got friends."
"No.  It's not me you want.  It's something in the wires.  It just…stole my name for some reason."
Beep.
A sudden luminous rectangle, framing a flicker of motion.  The stern camera zoomed reflexively.
"Hold on," Perreault said.  "I've got a—Lenie."
"What?"
"You might want to get off the road.  I think it's that psycho from the shelter."
It was.  Hunched over the handlebars of an ancient mountain bike, he resolved in the zoom window like a grainy nightmare.   He pumped, straining, all his weight on the pedals.  The vehicle had no seat.  It didn't have any tires, either; it rattled along the road on bare rims.  It was a skeleton ridden by a monster.  The monster's jacket was dark and wet, and missing one sleeve; it was not the one  he'd been wearing before.
He kept his eyes on the road; only once did he spare a glance back over his shoulder.  Eventually he faded in the murk.
"Lenie?"
"Here."  She rose from a drainage ditch.
"He's gone," Perreault said.  "The things you see when you don't have your gun.  Asshole."
"No worse than anyone else back there."  Clarke climbed back onto the road.  
"Except for the fact that he beat someone to death."
"And a hundred people stood around and watched.  Or didn't you notice?"
"Well—"
"People do that, you know.  Just stand around and do nothing.  They're fucking complicit, they're no better than—they're worse.  At least he took a little initiative."
"I didn't notice you standing up to him,"  Perreault snapped, and instantly regretted her own defensiveness.
Clarke turned to face the botfly and said nothing. After a moment she resumed walking.
"They're not all—complicit, Lenie," Perreault said, more gently.  "People want to act, they're just—afraid.   And sometimes, experience teaches you that the only way to cope is to just—shut down…"
"Oh yeah, we're all just victims of our past.  Don't you dare trot out that subroutine."
"What subroutine?"
"The poor little abuse victim.  You know what abuse is, really?  It's an excuse."
"Lenie, I'm not—"
"So some asshole grabs your cunt in daycare.  So someone rams their cock up your ass.  So what?  Bruises, maybe.  A bit of bleeding.  You suffer more injury if you fall off the swings and break your arm, so how come you don't hear anyone wailing about abuse then?"
A thousand kilometers away, Perreault reeled in the surge of Clarke's vehemence.  "I didn't say— and anyway, the physical injury's only part of it.  The emotional damage—"
"Crap.  You think we aren't built to withstand a little childhood trauma?  You know how many of the higher mammals eat their own young?  We wouldn't have lasted ten generations if a couple of childhood shit-kickings was enough to take us out for the count."
"Lenie—"
"You think all those armies and gangs and cops would be so keen on rape if we just didn't make such a big deal about it?  If we didn't get all weak-kneed and trembly at the thought of being violated?  Fuck that.  I've been attacked by things straight out of nightmares.  I've nearly been boiled and buried alive more times than I can count.  I know all about the ways you can push a body to the breaking point, and sexual abuse doesn't even make the top ten."
She stopped and glared across at Perreault's distant teleop.  Perreault zoomed:  the rifter was shaking.
"Or do you have some basis for disagreement?  Some personal experience to back up all your trendy platitudes?"
      Sure I had experience.  I watched.  For years I watched, and felt nothing.
It was my job… 
But of course she couldn't say that.  "I—no," was all she managed.  "Not really."
"Course not.  You're just a fucking tourist, aren't you?  You're safe and comfy in some glass tower somewhere, and you stick a periscope into the real world every now and then and tell yourself you're experiencing life or some such shit.  You're pathetic."
"Lenie—"
"Stop feeding off me."
She wouldn't say anything more.  She stalked silently along that road in the dirty rain, refusing entreaty or apology.  Brown sky faded to black.  Visible light failed, infra kicked in.  Lenie Clarke was a white-hot speck of anger at fixed range, endlessly moving.
In all that time she only spoke once.  The words were barely more than a growl, and Sou-Hon Perreault did not believe they were intended for her ears.  But the fly's enhanced senses had little regard for range and none for privacy:  filter and gain turned Clarke's words from distant static to ugly, unmistakable truth:
"Everybody pays." 
VISION QUEST
There were two reasons Achilles Desjardins didn't indulge in sex with real partners.  The second was, simulations gave him much more latitude.
His system was more than enough to handle the range.  His skin came equipped with the latest Lorenz-levitation haptics, their formless magnetic fingers both sensing his movements and responding to them.  The ad specs boasted you could feel a virtual ant crawling up your back.  They weren't lying.  The only way you'd get a better ride was to go with a direct neural interface, but Desjardins wasn't about to go that far; it wasn't widely known but there were creatures in Maelstrom that were learning to penetrate wetware.  The last thing he needed was some sourced shark hijacking his spinal cord.
And there were other dangers if you went with a wet link, dangers especially relevant to those with Desjardins' tastes.   There were still people out there who refused to recognize the difference between reality and simulation, between fantasy and assault.  Some of them were savvy enough to hack the things they found politically objectionable.
Take the present scenario.  It was a pretty sweet set-up, all told.  He had two girls strapped face-down on the table in front of him.  One of them was hooked up to a DC power supply by alligator clips on her nipples and clit.  The other had to be content with lower-tech forms of punishment, which Desjardins was currently administering with an unfinished broom handle.  Three others hung inverted against the far wall, passing time until their own numbers came up.  
It was exactly this sort of environment that certain disagreeable types took pleasure in messing with.  Desjardins knew of more than one occasion in which the victims of similar scenarios had miraculously freed themselves from their restraints, coming after the user with steak knives and hedge-clippers.  Incompetent but enthusiastic neutering generally followed; in at least one case the emergency interrupt had been overridden, keeping the player on the board right up to the final curtain call.  Such things were more than enough of a damper in a feedback skin.  If you got nailed through a neural link you could end up impotent for life. 
Which was, of course, the whole idea.
Achilles Desjardins was more cognizant of the risks than most.  He took, therefore, more precautions than most.  His sensorium was strictly standalone, with no physical connection to any kind of network.  He'd lobotomized the graphics circuitry to reduce its vulnerability to wildlife; it could only present chunky, low-rez images that would drive any normal connoisseur crazy, but Desjardins' own wetware more than made up the difference.  (The pattern-matching enhancements in his visual cortex interpolated those crude pixels into a subjective panorama crisp enough to leave the most jaded wirehead drooling.)  The scenarios themselves were scrubbed and disinfected right down to the texture maps.  Desjardins carried way more than his weight in this cesspool of a world; no way was some TwenCen puritan going to mess up any of his well-deserved moments with Mr. Bone.
Which made the sudden and complete failure of his system extremely disquieting.  There was a brief sharp prick in his neck and the whole environment just disappeared.
He floated there a moment, a stunned and disembodied being in an imperceptible void.  No sounds, no smells or tactile feedback, no vision—not even blackness, really.  Not like a window gone dark, not like closing your eyes.  More like not having any eyes to begin with.  You don't see blackness out of the back of your skull, after all, you don't—
Fuck, he thought.  They got in.  Any second now everything's going to come back online and they'll be spit-roasting me on a pole or something.
He tried to flex his fingers around the interrupt.  He didn't seem to have any fingers.  All his senses remained offline.  For a moment, he thought he might get off easy; maybe they hadn't infected his system, maybe they'd just crashed it.  It made sense—it was always easier to kill a system than subvert it.
Bit they shouldn't have been able to do either, for fuck's sake…and why can't I feel anything…?
"Hello?  Hello?  Is this thing on?"
What—
"Sorry.  Small attempt at humor.  I'm going to ask you a few questions, Achilles.  I want you to think long and hard about the answers."
The voice hung there in the void with him, sexless and innocent of ambience; no reverb, no quiet hum of nearby appliances, no background noise at all.  It was almost like a Haven voice, but even that seemed wrong.
"I want you to think about the ocean.  The very deep ocean.  Think about some of the things that live down there.  The microbes, especially.  Think about them."
He tried to speak.  No vocal cords.
"Good.  Now I want you to listen to some names.  You may recognize some of them.  Abigail McHugh."
He'd never heard of her.
"Donald Lertzman."
Lertzman?  How's he involved?
"Wolfgang Schmidt.  Judy Caraco." 
Is this some kind of Corpse loyalty te—oh Jesus.  That Haven contact.  Pickering's Pile.  It said it could find me…
"André Breault.   Patrician Rowan.  Lenie Clarke."
Rowan!  She behind this?  
 "Ken Lubin.  Leo Hin Tan the Third.  Mark Showell.  Michael Brander."
Yeah.  Rowan.  Maybe Alice isn't so paranoid after all.
"Good.  Now I want you to think about biochemistry.  Proteins.  Sulfur-containing amino acids."
??!?!?!…
"I can tell you're confused.  Let's narrow it down some.  Cysteine.  Methionine.  Think about those when you hear the following words…"
It's a mind-reading trick of some kind, Desjardins thought.
"Retrovirus.  Stereoisomer.  Sarcomere."
A quantum computer?
They didn't exist.  Of course, that was the official story on most banned technology, but in this case Desjardins was inclined to believe it.  Nobody in their right mind would be caught dead around a telepathic AI.  That had been one side-effect the Q-boosters hadn't seen coming:  the whole quantum-consciousness debate had been resolved overnight.  Who'd ever choose to build something that could sift through their minds like a chess grandmaster noodling around in a game of Xs and Os?  
Nobody, as far as Desjardins had been able to tell.
"Ion pump.  Thermophile."
But if not a quantum computer, then—
"Archaea.  Phenylindole."
Ganzfeld.
Not a computer, except for the interrogation interface.  Not telepathy either; not quite.  Cruder.  The faint quantum signals of human consciousness, cut away from the noise and sensory static that usually swamped them.  Properly insulated from such interference, you had a better-than-average chance of guessing what your subject was looking at, or listening to.  You could feel the vicarious echo of distant emotions.  With the right insulation, and the right stimuli, you could learn a lot.
So Desjardins had been told.  He'd never actually experienced it before.
"Good.  Now, think about the assignments you've had at MEMA over the past month."
Mange de la marde.  Just because some disembodied voice told him to think about something, didn't mean he had to leap up and—
"Ah.  There's a familiar pattern.  Here's an exercise for you, Achilles:  whatever you do, do not think of a red-eyed baboon with hemorrhoids."
Oh, shit.
"You see?  Nothing's more doomed to failure than trying really hard not to think about something.  Shall we continue?  Think about your MEMA assignments for the past six months."
A red-eyed baboon with--
"Think of earthquakes, and tidal waves.  Think of any possible connections."
Isn't this a security breach?  Shouldn't Guilt Trip be doing something?
Earthquakes.  Tidal waves.  He couldn't keep them out.
Maybe it is.  Maybe Trip's seized up my whole body.  If I even still have a body.  How would I know?
Fires.
Oh Jesus.  I'll give everything away…
Threads of emerald light, lancing through the fog. 
"Think of containment protocols.  Think of collateral damage."
Stop it, stop it…
"Did you plan it?"
No!  No, I—
"Did you know in advance?"
How could I, they don't tell me any—
"Did you find out afterwards?"
If Trip's working, my body's already dead. Oh motherfucking bloodspewing sickle-celled savior…
"Did you approve?"
What kind of stupid question is that?
Nothing, for a very long time.
I feel awful, Desjardins thought.  Then:  Hey—
Despair, guilt, fear—chemicals, all. Hormones and neurotransmitters, a medley brewed not just in the brain, but in glands throughout the body.  The physical body.
I'm still alive.  I've still got a body even if I can't feel it.
"Let's talk about you," said the voice at last.  "How have you been lately, healthwise?  Have you had any cuts or injuries?  Anything to break the skin?"
I'm feeling a bit better, thank you.
"Any symptoms of illness?
"Any inoculations within the past two weeks?
"Blood tests?  Unusual reactions to recreational transderms?
"Real sexual experiences?"
Never.  I'd never inflict that on a person…
Silence.
Hey.  You there?
With a blinding flash and a roar like an angry ocean, the real world crashed in from all sides.

#

After a while everything desaturated to normal intensity.  He stared up at his living room ceiling and waited while a cacophony of ambient sounds faded down a single, rhythmic scrubbing.
Someone's in here.
He tried to rise; a sharp pain in his neck kept him from any sudden moves, but he managed to get erect and stay that way.  In only the most innocent sense, unfortunately; his feedback skin was folded neatly to one side.  He was completely naked.
The scrubbing sound was coming from the bathroom.
He didn't have any weapons.  At this point he didn't think he needed any; if the intruder had meant to kill him he'd be dead already.  Desjardins stepped tentatively towards the hallway and nearly took a header into the wall; Mandelbrot, true to form, had got in his way and tried the classic feline figure-eight-around-the-legs takedown.
Desjardins spared a silent curse and crept towards the bathroom.
Someone was standing at the sink without any pants on.
Seen from the back:  medium height, but built like a Ballard stack.  Dark hair, flecked with gray; navy cable-knit sweater; black underwear; little scars all over the backs of the legs. Bare feet.  His pants were draped along the counter; he was scrubbing at one leg in the sink.
"Your cat pissed on me," he said without turning.
Desjardins shook his head; his neck reminded him of the stupidity of that gesture. "What?"
"When we had our session," the stranger said.  (Desjardins glanced in the mirror but the man's face was tilted down, intent on his task.)  "I assume someone in your position knows about Ganzfeld techniques?"
"I've heard of them," Desjardins said.
"Then you know you have to minimize extraneous signal.  Nerve blocks on all the main sensory cables, everything.  I was just as disconnected as you."
"But you were talking—"
The intruder nudged a small beige fanny-pack on the floor with his foot.  "That was talking.  I just set up the dialog tree.  Anyway,"—he straightened, his back still to the door—"your stupid cat pissed on my leg when I was laid out."
Good for my stupid cat, Desjardins didn't say.
"I thought only dogs were supposed to do that."
Desjardins shrugged.  "Mandelbrot's kind of a mutant."
The intruder grunted, and turned.
He wasn't exactly ugly.  More like what would result if someone with limited artisan skills carved a human face in a totem pole; it might not run to your taste, but there was no denying a certain crude aesthetic.  More tiny scars on the face.  Still; not quite ugly.
Scary, though.  That fit.  Desjardins didn't exactly know what it was that made him think that.
"You're immune to Guilt Trip," the intruder told him.  "Want to guess how that happened?"
THE ALGEBRA OF GUILT
The naked 'lawbreaker was watching him with wary curiosity.  Not much actual fear, Lubin noted.  When you routinely juggled thousands of lives for a living, you probably figured that other people were the ones with cause to worry.  Sudbury was a safe, law-abiding place.  Wielding his godlike control over the real world, Desjardins had probably forgotten what it was like to actually live in it.
"Who are you?" Desjardins asked.
"Name's Colin,"  Lubin said.
"Uh huh.  And why does Rowan have such a hard-on for testing my loyalty?"
"Maybe you didn't hear me," Lubin said.  "You're immune to Guilt Trip."
"I heard you.  I just think you're full of shit."
"Really."  Lubin laid the slightest emphasis on the word.
"Nice try, Colin, but I kind of keep up on that stuff."
"I see."
"Don't get me wrong, I'm not saying it's indestructible.  I can think of a few commercial enzymes that break it down just off the top of my head.  The right kind of reuptake inhibitor blockers could do the job too, I'm told.  That's why they have these tests, you see?  That's why I can barely go two days without some bloodhound sniffing my crotch.  Believe me, if I was immune to Guilt Trip I'd already know it, and so would every security database up to geosynch.  And you know, the really odd thing about this is that Rowan must know that alread—"
He never had a chance to move.  Lubin was behind him in the space of a syllable, had one arm locked around his throat in two.  The long curved needle in his other hand tickled Desjardins' eardrum suggestively. 
"You have three seconds to tell me what it's called,"  Lubin whispered, relaxing his grip just enough to permit some semblance of speech.
"?ehemoth," Desjardins gasped.  
Lubin tightened his grip again.  "Place of origin.  Two seconds." Relaxed it.
"Deep sea!  Juan de Fuca, Channer Vent I thin—"
"Worst-case scenario.  One."
"Everything dies, for fuck's sake!  Everything just fades away…"
Lubin let him go.
Desjardins staggered forward against the sink, gulping air.  Lubin could see his face reflected in the mirror:  panic subsiding, the higher brain kicking in, reassessment of threat potential, dawning awareness of—
Three breaches he'd just committed.  Three violations when Guilt Trip should have risen from within and throttled him even more tightly than Lubin just had…
Achilles Desjardins turned and faced Lubin with horror and fear spreading across his face.
"Maudite marde …"
"I told you, " Lubin said.  "You're a free agent.  Vive le gardien libre."

#

"How'd you do it?" Desjardins slumped morosely on the couch next to his clothes.  "More to the point, why?   The next time I show up for work I'm screwed.  Rowan knows that.  What's she trying to prove?"
"I'm not here for Rowan," Lubin said.  "Rowan's the problem, in fact.  I'm here on behalf of her superiors."
"Yeah?"  Desjardins actually seemed to approve of that.  Not surprising.  Patricia Rowan had never exactly endeared herself to the lower ranks.
"There are concerns that some of the information we've received from her office has been tainted," Lubin continued.  "I'm here to cut out the middleman and get the unadulterated truth.  You're going to help me."
"And I'm not much good to you if my brain seizes up every time you ask a touchy question."
"Yes."
Desjardins began getting dressed. "Why not just go through channels?  GT won't raise a peep if I know the orders are coming from higher up the food chain."
"Rowan would peep."
"Oh.  Right."  Desjardins pulled his shirt on over his head.  "So tell me if I've got this down:  you ask me a bunch of questions, and if I don't answer them to the best of my ability you stick a needle in my ear.  If I do, you let me go and the next time I go to work I set off more sirens than I can count.  They take me apart piece by piece to find out what went wrong, and if I'm very very lucky they'll just throw me into the street as a security risk.  Is that about right?"
"Not exactly," Lubin said.
"What, then?"
"I'm not the snuff fairy," Lubin said.  In fact, that was exactly what someone had called him, nearly two years ago now.  "I don't leap gaily from door to door killing people for no good reason.  And you're going to do more than answer a few questions for me.  You're going to take me to work and show me your files."
"Not after—"
Lubin held up a derm between thumb and forefinger.  "Trip analog.  Short-lived and fairly inert, but it looks pretty much the same to a bloodhound.  Stick it under your tongue fifteen minutes before getting to work and you'll pass the tests.  If you cooperate, no one will know the difference."
"Until you bugger off and take your analog with you."
"You're forgetting how Guilt Trip works, Desjardins.  Your own cells are producing the stuff.  I haven't stopped that.  I've just dosed you with something to break down the finished product before it hits your motor nerves.   Eventually it'll get used up and you'll be a happy little slave again."
"How long?"
"Week or ten days.  Depends on individual metabolism.  Even if I do bugger off, you could always just call in sick until it wears off."
"I can't and you know it.  I got my immunes boosted when I joined the Patrol.  I'm even immune to Supercol."
Lubin shrugged.  "Then you'll just have to trust me."

#

It fact, it had been lies from the word go.
Lubin had not freed Achilles Desjardins.  He'd merely stumbled on the discovery as they both lay on the floor, disconnected from themselves and strangely linked to each other through a mechanical interrogator.  The derm he'd presented had been an acetylcholine booster, a memory aid one step removed from candy.  His words had been spun on the fly, woven around the 'lawbreakers' reactions in the Ganzfeld:  Rowan, yes.  Strong reaction there.  No reaction to rifter names, but horror and recognition at the thought of earthquakes and tidal waves and mysterious fires.  
Desjardins had pursued the truth, and recoiled from it.  He had not set any of the larger wheels in motion.  As far as Lubin could tell, he didn't even know how many wheels there were.
He hadn't known that he was immune to Guilt Trip, either.  That was especially interesting.  Desjardins had been right—it would be impossible to avoid one of MEMA's spot checks for more than a day or two.   So barring the unlikely possibility that Desjardins had acquired his immunity within the past few hours, his body had done a lot more than throw off GT;  it had managed to hide that fact from the bloodhounds.
Lubin had not realized that freedom from Guilt Trip was possible.  It raised certain prospects he had not previously considered.
STARFUCKER
Marq Quammen was primed and ready.
Tornado season was just winding down in the Dust Belt; three solid months of flywheel repairs had fed the chip in his thigh until it was six digits fat, and he had a month until spring run-off started clogging the dams up north.  Options were tempting and plentiful in the meantime.  He could boost his chloroplasts to UV-shield levels and bugger off to the Carolines.  He could check out the underwater Club Med over in Hattaras—he'd heard they'd walled off a whole bay with this big semipermeable membrane, let the ocean in but kept out all those nasty synthetic macromolecules and heavy metals.  Their cultured coral had finally taken off; it might even be open to the tourists by now.   That would be something to see.  There hadn't been wild coral anywhere in N'Am since Key West had packed it in.
Of course, these days there were all sorts of nasty things waiting to jump on you when you ventured outside.  That new bug the left-coast refugees had brought over, for instance—the all-purpose one that killed you a dozen different ways.  Maybe it'd be better to just stay in this dark, cozy little booth in this dark, cozy little drink'n'drug at the edge of the Belt, and let Breakthroughs in BrainChem provide him a richness of experience he could never get in the real world.  That was pretty tempting too.  Plus he could start right now.  
Already had started, in fact.  Quammen stretched and settled deeper into his cushioned alcove and watched the local butterflies sparkling at each other.  Upstairs the world was a salt-baked oven; if you were an unprotected eyeball out there the only question was whether you'd go saltblind before the wind sandblasted you down to pitted gelatin.  In here, though, it was always dark and the air barely moved.  He felt like a cat in a nook in a dark green cave, surveying a subterranean domain.  
There was a little blonde K-selector sitting alone at the bar.  Quammen absently stuck a derm behind his ear and aimed his watch at her.   Passive infrared and a few ultrasonic squeaks, barely audible even to bats, bounced back and forth.
She turned and looked at him.  Her eyes were a flat and startling ivory.
She started towards him.
Quammen's watch flashed him an executive summary:  she wasn't horny.  He didn't know her.  
He couldn't think of any other reason she'd approach him, though.
She stopped just outside the alcove, a hint of a smile beneath those strange blank eyes. 
"Nice effect," Quammen said, seizing the initiative.  "You see in X-ray with those things?"
"So what was that?"
"What was what?"
"You zapped me with something."
"Oh."  Quammen raised his hand, let her see the whisper-thin filament extending from his watch.  "You got some kind of sensor on you?"
She shook her head.  Thin lips, small tits, great hips.  Sharp edges, just slightly smoothed.  Like a perfect little ice-sculpture, left a minute too long in the sun.
"So how'd you know?" Quammen asked.
"I felt it."
"Bullshit.  The IR's passive, the sonar's real weak."
"I've got an implant," said the K.  "Hard stuff.  You can feel it when the sound hits."
"Implant?"  This could be interesting.
"Yeah.  So, what are you doing here?"
Quammen snuck another peak at his watch; no, she wasn't on the prowl.  Hadn't been a minute ago, anyway.  Maybe that was open to negotiation.  Maybe it had already changed.  He wanted to scope her out again, but he didn't want to give himself away.  Shit.  Why'd she have to be sensitive to probes?
"I said—"
"Just coming off a nice fat contract," he told her.  "Riding flywheels.  Figuring out my next move."
She slid in beside him, grabbed a derm from the table dispenser.  "Tell me about it."

#

She was fucking cryptic, is what she was.
Or maybe just old-fashioned.  She hadn't propositioned him outright, which was a drag; it wasted time.  Quammen would've propositioned her in an instant, but unless his plug-in was wrecked she hadn't been receptive at first, and that probably meant he was going to have to work at it.  He couldn't remember the last time he'd had to rely on instinct of all things to know whether a woman was interested or not, and this Lenie wasn't making things any easier.  A couple of times he'd put a hand here or there and she'd literally flinched.  But then she'd run a finger down his arm, or tap the back of his hand, and just generally come on wet as a hagfish.   
If she wasn't interested, why was she wasting his time?  Was she really here for the conversation?
By the third derm it didn't seem to matter so much. "You know what I am?" Quammen demanded.  An influx of exogenous transmitters had made him suddenly eloquent.  "I'm a fucking crusader, is what I am!  It is my personal mission to save the world from the Quebecois!"
She blinked lazily over her alien eyes.  "Too late," she said.
"You know, only fifty years ago, people paid less than a third of their disposable income on energy?  Less than a third?"
"I did not know that,"  Lenie answered.
"And the world's ending.  It's ending right now."
"That," Lenie said, "I did know."
"Do you know when?  Do you know when the end began?"
"Last August." 
"Twenty thirty-five.  The onset of adaptive shatter.  When damage control started accounting for more of the GGP than the production of new goods."
"Damage control?"
"Damage control."  He pounded the table for emphasis.  "My whole life is damage control.  I fix the things that entropy breaks.  Things fall apart, Lenie my lass.  The only way you can stop the slide is throw energy at it.  That's the only way we got from primordial slime to human slime.  Evolution'd be sockeye without the sun to lean on."
"Oh, there are places where evolution didn't need the sun—"
"Yeah, yeah, but you get my point.  The more complicated any system becomes, the more fragile it is.  All that ecobabble about diversity promotes stability, that's pure bullshit.  You take your coral reef or your tropical rainforest, those things were starved  for energy.  You've got so many species, so many energy pathways using up resources that there's hardly a spare erg left over.  Drive through a rainforest with a bulldozer or two and tell me how stable that system ends up being."
"Oops," Lenie said.  "Too late."
Quammen barely heard her.  "Now what we've got here is a system that's so complicated, it makes a tropical rainforest look like a fucking monoculture.   Everything gets way too complicated for mere mortals so we set up webs and networks and AIs to keep track of things except they end up exploding into these huge cancers of complexity too—so that only makes the problem worse—and of course now all the underlying infrastructure is breaking down, the weather and the biosphere are all fucked up so not only to we need oodles more energy to keep this huge wobbling gyro from crashing over on its side, but those same factors keep knocking out the systems we put in place to produce all that extra energy, you see what I'm sayin'?  You know what apocalypse is?  It's a positive feedback loop!"
"So why blame Quebec for all this?  They're the only ones who got their asses in gear fast enough to save anything.  It was the Hydro Wars that—"
"Here it comes.  Quebec was gonna save the world, and if only we hadn't ganged up on the frogs we'd all be sipping neurococktails on a beach somewhere and Maelstrom would be nice and clean and bug-free, and—ah, don't get me started."
"Too late for that too."
"Hey, I'm not saying the war didn't kick Maelstrom past critical mass.  Maybe it did.  But it would've happened anyway.  Five years, tops.  And do you really think the frogs had any more foresight than the rest of us?  They just lucked out with their geography.  Anyone could make the world's biggest hydro facility if they had all of Hudson Bay to dam up.  And who was going to stop them?  The Cree tried, did you know that?  Remember the Cree? A few thousand malcontents up around James Bay, just before that nasty and unfortunate plague that only killed abos.  And after that went down, Nunavut just rolled over and did what they were told, and the rest of fucking Canada was still so busy trying to lure the frogs back into bed they were willing to look the other way over pretty much anything.  And now it's too late, and the rest of us run around playing catch-up with our windfarms and our photosynthesis arrays and our deep-sea geothermal—"
Lenie's eyes floated in front of him.  Something clicked in Quammen's head.
"Hey," he said after a moment, "are you a—"
She grabbed his wrist and pulled him out of the alcove.  "Enough of this bullshit.  Let's fuck."

#

She was something else.
She had seams in her chest, and a perforated metal disk poking out between her ribs.  She told him, around mouthfuls of cock, that a childhood injury had left her with a prosthetic lung.  It was an obvious lie, but he didn't call her on it.  Everything was making sense now, right down to the way she kept freezing up and trying to hide it, the way she acted hot to cover how cold she was.
She was a rifter.  Quammen had heard about them—hell, they were the competition.  N'AmPac had sent them down to hydrothermal vents all over the eastern Pacific, until word got out that they were all completely fucked in the head.  Something about abuse survivors being best-suited for risky deep-sea work, some reductomechanist shit like that.  It was no wonder Lenie wasn't keen on sharing her life story.  Quammen wasn't going to push her on it.
Besides, the sex was pretty good.  The occasional flinch notwithstanding, she seemed to know exactly what to do.  Quammen had heard the usual rumors—the Wisdom of the Old Ones, he liked to call them.  If you want good sex, find an abuse victim.  Didn't seem quite right to put something like that to the test, but after all, she'd been the one to take the lead.
And what do you know:  the Old Ones spake the truth.
He fucked her so hard his cock came out bloody.  He frowned, sudden concern wilting him like a stalk of old celery.  "Whoa…"
She just smiled.
"Is that you?  Are you hurt?  Is it—" 
—oh crap, is it me?
"I'm an old-fashioned girl," she said, looking up at him.
"What do you mean?"  Surely he'd have felt it if something had cut his cock…
"I menstruate."
"You—you're kidding."  Why would anyone choose to – "I mean, that's really TwenCen."  He stood and reached for a towel on the dresser.  "You could've told me," he said, wiping at himself. 
"Sorry," she said.
"Well, pick your own pleasure, by all means," Quammen said.  "It's no big deal, I just thought—"
She'd left her pack unzipped on the floor beside the dresser.  Something glinted wet and dark from inside.  He leaned slightly for a better view.
"Ah," he said, "—sorry if I—ah…"
A utility clip, blade extended.  Used.
"Sure," she said behind him.  "Fine."
She cut herself.  Before we fucked, must've been when I was in the bathroom.  She cut her own insides.
He turned back to the bed.  Lenie was already half-dressed.  Her face was a blank mask; it framed her eyes perfectly.
She noticed his gaze.  She smiled again.  Marq Quammen felt a tiny chill.
"Nice meeting you," she said.  "Go, and sin some more."
MASK
The bloodhound nipped him on the finger and fixed him with one dark, suspicious eye.
GT analog my ass, Desjardins thought. What if it doesn't work? What if Colin's lying, what if—
The eye blinked and turned green.
Colin swept past security as Desjardins' guest.  Guilt Trip wasn't an honor bestowed upon everyone, not even upon all those who might have legitimate commerce within the halls of the Entropy Patrol.  Colin passed beneath eyes that stripped flesh to the bone—thoracic implants, Desjardins noticed, although the machines seemed to think them innocuous enough—but there was no need to drink his blood or read his mind.  He was, after all, in the trusted company of Achilles Desjardins, who would never dream of granting access to any potential security threat. 
This fucker could kill me, Desjardins thought. 
Colin closed the cubby door behind them; Desjardins linked his eyes into the panel and split the feed to the wall so Colin could eavesdrop.  He told the Matchmaker to route incoming assignments around him until further notice.  The system, confident that no minion would shirk responsibility without good reason, acknowledged promptly.
Alone again, with the man who carried long needles in his pocket.
"What do you want to see?" Desjardins asked.
"Everything," Colin said.

#

"That's pretty sparse," Colin remarked, studying the plot.  "Not your usual pandemic."
He must have meant inland;??ehemoth was sprouting everywhere along the coast.  
Desjardins shrugged.  "It's not anthrax.  Not even a disease really, just sort of a —a competitor.  Still has trouble invading new habitat.  Needs a lot of dice rolls before it gets a foothold."
"It seems to be doing well enough on the Strip."
"Superdense population.  More dice rolls."
"How's it getting around?"
"Not sure.  It didn't book a commercial flight."  Desjardins pointed at the scattered blotches east of the Rockies.  "These new hits just started showing up a couple of weeks ago, and they're not consistent with any of the major travel corridors."  He sighed.  "I suppose we're lucky the quarantine held as long as it did."
"No,  I mean how does it transmit?  Respiratory aerosols, skin contact?  Body fluids?"
"In theory it could get around on the bottom of somebody's boot.  But you'd probably need more than a dirty boot to carry critical mass, so the secondary wouldn't persist."
"Human reservoirs, then."
Desjardins nodded.  "Alice says it'd be nice and comfy inside a body.  So yeah, it'd probably spread like some kind of conventional infection.  Then when a vector takes a shit or pukes in the grass, you've got an innoculation into the outside world."
"Who's Alice?"
"Just another 'lawbreaker.  Shared the assignment."  Desjardins hoped Colin didn't ask for details.  Anyone that man got curious about might have reason to worry.
But Colin only pointed at the display.   "Your vectors. How many got past the mountains?"
"Don't know.  Not my case any more.  I'd guess only a few, though."
"So who are they?"
"I'd say people who worked on the Beebe construction contract.  Infected before anyone knew there was a problem."
"So why aren't they dead, if they were infected first?"
"Good question." Another shrug.  "Maybe they aren't infected.  Maybe they're carrying it some other way."
"In a jar or something?"  Lubin seemed almost amused by that.  "Johnny Appleseed with a grudge?"
Desjardins didn't know and didn't ask.  "Wouldn't have to be deliberate, necessarily.  Maybe just some piece of heavy equipment that gets moved around a lot."
"But you'd be able to track that.  Even a bunch of infected contract workers should be easy enough to track down."
"You'd think."  Didn't seem to be much of a problem to the guys with the flamethrowers, anyway…
"Yet you couldn't find any candidates in the record."
"No living ones, anyway."
"What about the rifters?"  Colin suggested.  "That whole scene seems to be fashionable these days.  Maybe there's a connection."
"They were all—"
—killed in the quake.  But the bottom dropped out of his stomach before he could finish ther thought.
What about the rifters?
The scanners at security had seen machinery in Colin's chest.
Desjardins, you idiot. 
The rifters.
One of them was standing right at his shoulder.  

#

A single petrified moment to wonder which road had led to this:
Let's-call-him-Colin had risen from the ashes of Beebe Station and was pursuing his own apocalyptic agenda.  Johnny Appleseed with a Grudge, whatever the fuck that meant—
Or:
Let's-call-him-Colin hadn't been stationed at Beebe at all, he just had a—a  personal interest.  A friend, perhaps, a fellow rifter sacrificed for the greater good.  But maybe Colin wasn't satisfied with the greater good.  Maybe Colin wanted closure.
Or:
Thoracic implants didn't necessarily equal an amphibious lifestyle.  Maybe Let's-call-him-Colin wasn't even a rifter.  He sure as shit wasn't an ordinary one, anyway.  How many of those neurotic head cases would have been able to find Desjardins in the first place?  How many could have broken into his home, laid him out, read his mind, threatened his very life without breaking a sweat?
Am I infected?  Am I dying? Am I leaving traces for someone like me to sniff out?
Am I on a list?
Nearly a second had passed since the words had died in Desjardins' throat
I've got to say something.  Jesus, what do I say?
"Actually—" he began.  
He wants me to search Beebe's personnel files.  What if he's in there? Of course he won't be, he wouldn't blow his own cover that wouldn't make sense—
"—I'm way—"
Whatever he wants he doesn't want me to know he wants it, oh no, he's being way too casual about this, just another possibility to follow up, right—
He won't push.  He won't force it—
"—ahead of you on that," Desjardins finished easily.  "I checked the rifters already.  I checked everyone who had anything to do with Beebe.  Nothing.  Nobody's touched their bank accounts, no watch transactions, nothing at all since the quake."  
He glanced up at Colin, kept his voice level.  "But they were pretty much at ground zero when the Big One went off.  Why would you think they'd survive?"
Colin looked back neutrally.  "No reason.  Just being systematic."
"Mmm."  Desjardins drummed his fingers absently on the edge of the board.  His inlays lit with visual confirmation:  he'd opened a channel directly to his inlays, without—he glanced at the wall just to be sure—without sending an echo to any external displays.
"You know, I was thinking."  Another idle tap on the panel; a luminous keypad sprang up in his head, invisible beyond his own flesh.  "About why the primary vectors aren't dying as fast as the people on the Strip."  His eyes darted subtly across the pad, focussing for the merest instant here, and here, and here on the characters.  Letters brightened at his glance, began forming a command. "Maybe a nastier strain's developed out there."  B—e—e—  "Maybe the higher population density—all those extra dice rolls—maybe they just lead to a higher mutation rate." 
Beebe Station.
Private menus bloomed around the edge of his vision.  He focused on Personnel.
Let's-call-him-Colin grunted.
Four women, four men.  Desjardins brought up the men; whoever was standing next to him probably hadn't changed that much.  
"And if there's two separate strains, our propagation models are probably wrong," he said aloud.  
Employee headshots.  All faces unfamiliar.  But the eyes…
He looked up.  Let's-call-him-Colin looked back through a luminous palimpsest. 
Those eyes…
The flesh had been reconstructed around them.  The irises were darker.  But for all that, the differences were cosmetic; a flaw in the iris left unchanged, a telltale capillary snaking across the sclera.  And the overall aspect ratio of the face was identical.  A casual change in appearance, more disguise than reconstruction.  A new face, a new pair of socks, and—
"Something wrong?"  asked Kenneth Lubin.
Desjardins swallowed.
"Uh, the caffeine," he managed.  "Sort of sneaks up on you.  I'll be right back."

#

He barely saw the corridors scroll past.  He missed the washroom entirely.
Oh God.  He's been in my home he's breathed in my face he even stabbed me in the neck with something and he's probably rotten with ?ehemoth, it's probably growing in me now it's probably—
Shut up.  Focus.  You can deal with this.
If Lubin were infected, he'd probably be dead already.  He'd said as much himself.  So he probably wasn't a carrier.  That was something.
He could still be packing, of course:  Johnny Appleseed with a grudge, lugging ?ehemoth around in a mason jar.  But what if he was?  Why would he cross a continent just to innoculate Achilles Desjardins of all people?  If he'd wanted Desjardins dead for some reason, he could have done it while the 'lawbreaker was laid out on his own living room floor.
That was something, too.
Probably both of them were clean.  Desjardins allowed himself a moment to feel sick with relief, then opened the door to Jovellanos' cubby.
It was empty; she'd taken the day to burn off some accumulated overtime.  Achilles Desjardins thanked the Forces of Entropy for small mercies.  He could use her board, at least for a few minutes.  For however long one might reasonably be expected to spend on the toilet.
He hooked his account and considered:
Lubin wanted him to see Beebe's personnel files.  Didn't he realise that Desjardins would make the connection, once the ID photos came up?   Maybe not.  He was only human, after all.  Maybe he'd forgotten about the pattern-matching enhancements that 'lawbreakers came equipped with these days.  Maybe he'd never known in the first place.
Or maybe he had wanted Desjardins to see through his new identity.  Maybe this was some twisted loyalty test courtesy of Patricia Rowan after all.
Still.  It seemed more plausible that Col— that Lubin was interested in the other rifters.  He either wanted to know something about them, or he wanted Achilles Desjardins to know something about them.  
Desjardins fed names to the Matchmaker and sent it hunting.
"Semen-sucking savior," he whispered two seconds later.

#

She was proliferating in plain sight.  She'd been reported on half a dozen continents in a single day.  Lenie Clarke was on the run in Australia.  She was making friends in N'AmPac and planning an insurrection in Mexico City.  She was wanted in connection with an assault in HongCouver.  She was a porn star who'd been snuffed at eleven years of age.
More ominously, Lenie Clarke was ending the world.  And nobody—at least as far as Desjardins could tell—had actually noticed.
Nobody that mattered, anyway.  The official news threads, jam-packed with the latest on this terrorist group or that arboviral outbreak, had nothing to say about her at all.  The intel channels listed a few scattered acts of violence or sabotage, backtracked to anarchists and malcontents who'd cited the name as inspiration.  But bad times bred dime-store messiahs like roaches, and there were thousands with more of a profile than Lenie Clarke.
Hell, none of the official outlets had even bothered to issue a denial on the subject.
It didn't make sense.  Even the wildest rumors had to come out of the gate somewhere—how could all these people have started trumpeting the same thing at the same time?  There'd been no media coverage, and there was way too much traffic for mere word-of-mouth to account for.
There was so much stuff on Lenie Clarke, in fact, that he almost didn't notice Ken Lubin and Mike Brander peeping over the lower edge of the scope.  There wasn't much on them—a few hundred threads, all starting within the past couple of days.  But they too seemed strangely susceptible to corrupted address headers and blocked-sender syndrome.  And they, too, were proliferating.  
What about the rifters?  That whole scene seems to be fashionable these days…
Lubin's words.  Achilles Desjardins was the one with the optimised wetware, and still Lubin had had to connect the dots for him.  All Desjardins had seen was a bunch of sick tragic fucks in the news, slick uniforms—a fashion thing, he'd thought.  A fad.  It had never occurred to him that there might be individuals at the center of it all. 
Okay.  Now you know.  Where does that get you?
He leaned back in Jovellanos' seat, ran his fingers along his scalp.  No obvious correlation between rifter sightings and ?ehemoth outbreaks, as far as he could tell.  Unless—
His feet hit the floor with a thump.  That's it.
His hands danced across the panel, almost autonomously.  Axes rose from the swampy baseline, stretched to credible limits, sank back into the mud.  Variables clustered together, fell apart like swarms of starlings.  Desjardins grabbed them, shook them out, stretched them along a single thread called time.  
That's it. The sightings cluster in time.
Now, take the first sighting from each cluster and throw away the rest.  GPS  them on a map.
"Will you look at that," he murmured. 
A rough zigzag, trending east to west across temperate North America, then veering south.  ?ehemoth bloomed along the same trajectory.
Someone was watching Maelstrom for sightings of Lenie Clarke.  And whenever they found one, they dropped a whole cluster of fake sightings into the system to muddy the waters.  Someone was trying to hide her tracks and make her famous at the same time.
Why, for God's sake?
In the back of his head, synapses fired.
Something else lurked in that data, something that coalesced along the same axis.  The homegrown parts of Achilles Desjardins glimpsed that shape and recoiled, refusing the insight.  The optimized parts couldn't look away.
Maybe a coincidence, he thought, inanely. Maybe—
Someone knocked on the door.  Desjardins froze.
It's him.
He didn't why he was so certain.  Could've been anyone, really.
It's him.  He knows where I am.  Of course he knows, he's probably got me radiotagged, I bet he's got me pegged to the centimeter— 
—And he knows I lied to him.
Lubin had to know.  Lenie Clarke was all over Maelstrom; there was no way on Earth Desjardins could have run a check and found nothing at all since the quake.
Knock.  Knock.
The door wouldn't unlock for anyone who didn't have MEMA clearance.  The door wasn't unlocking.
Oh yeah.  It's him all right. 
He didn't speak.  God knew what kind of snoops Lubin might have pressed up against the door.  He opened an outside line and began tapping.  It only took a few seconds.  
Send.
Someone grunted softly on the other side of the door.  Footsteps faded down the hall.
Desjardins checked his watch:  he'd been away from his office for almost six minutes.  Much longer and it would start to look suspicious.
Look suspicious?  He knows, you idiot!  That's why he was at the door, just to—let you know.  You didn't fool him for a second.
And yet…if Lubin had known, he hadn't said anything.  He'd played along.  For whatever cold-blooded fucked-in-the-head rifter reason, he'd maintained the pretence.
Maybe—oh please God—he'd continue to do so.
Desjardins waited another thirty seconds on the chance that his message might net an immediate reply.  It didn't.  He crept back into an empty corridor.
Patricia Rowan must have been otherwise engaged.
SCALPEL
      The door to Desjardins' cubby was closed.
      Hey there, Ken—er, Colin—
      Yeah, I used the upstairs john, the stalls play better ads up there for some reason—
      I suppose you're wondering what I was doing in Alice's office just now—she asked me to check her mail, they don't let us link in from outside—
      He took a breath.  No point in getting ahead of himself.  Lubin might not even bring it up.  That might not even have been Lubin.
      Yeah, right.
      He opened the door.  The cubby was empty.  
      Desjardins didn't know whether to be relieved or terrified.  He closed the door behind himself and locked it.
Unlocked it again.  
What was the point, anyway?  Lubin would come back or he wouldn't.  He'd raise a challenge or he wouldn't.  But whoever Lubin was, he already had Achilles Desjardins by the balls; breaking the routine now would only make things uglier.
And it wasn't as though he was really alone anyway.  There was another kind of monster in the cubby with him.  He'd already glimpsed it lurking behind Jovellanos' panel.  He'd almost been able to deny it then; that knock on the door had almost been a relief.
But it was here too.  He could hear it snuffling in his data like a monster in the closet.   He could seen that closet doorknob turn slowly back and forth, taunting him.  He'd seen frightening outlines, at least; he'd looked away before any details had registered.  But now, waiting for Lubin's return, there was nothing else to do.
He opened the closet door and looked it in the face.
The thousand faces of Lenie Clarke.
It seemed innocent enough at first; a cloud of points congealing in a roughly Euclidean volume.  Time ran through its center like a spinal cord.  Where the cloud was thickest, rumors of Lenie Clarke grew in a wild profusion of hearsay and contradiction.  Where it narrowed the tales were less diverse, more consistent.
But Achilles Desjardins had built a career out of seeing shapes in the clouds.  The thing he saw now was beyond his experience.
Rumors had their own classic epidemiology.   Each started with a single germinating event.  Information spread from that point, mutating and interbreeding— a conical mass of threads, expanding into the future from the apex of their common birthplace.  Eventually, of course, they'd wither and die; the cone would simply dissipate at its wide end, it permutations senescent and exhausted.
There were exceptions, of course.  Every now and then a single thread persisted, grew thick and gnarled and unkillable:  conspiracy theories and urban legends, the hooks embedded in popular songs, the comforting Easter-bunny lies of religious doctrine.  These were the memes: viral concepts, infections of conscious thought.  Some flared and died like mayflies.  Others lasted a thousand years or more, tricked billions into the endless propagation of parasitic half-truths.
Lenie Clarke was a meme, but a meme unlike any other.  She had not extruded slowly from a birth point, as far as Desjardins could tell; she'd simply appeared, all over the datascape, wearing a thousand faces.  There'd been no smooth divergence, no monotonic branching of informational variants.  The variation had exploded too quickly to trace back to any single point.
And ever since its appearance, all that variance had been—focusing…
Two months ago Lenie Clarke had been an AI and a refugee terrorist and a prostitute messiah and other impossible things too numerous to count.  Now, she was one thing and one thing only:  the Mermaid of the Apocalypse.  Oh, there was still variation; was she infested with incendiary nanotech, did she carry a bioengineered plague, had she brought back some apocalyptic microbe from the deep sea?  Differences in detail, nothing more.  The essential truth beneath it all had converged:  the textbook conic had somehow flipped one-hundred-eighty impossible degrees, and Lenie Clarke had gone from a thousand faces to one.  Now, she was only the end of the world.
It was as though someone or something had offered the world a myriad styles, and the world had chosen the one it liked best.  Veracity didn't enter into such things; only resonance did.
And the meme that defined Lenie Clarke as an angel of apocalypse wasn't prospering because it was true; it was prospering because, insanely, people wanted it to be.
I do not accept this, Achilles Desjardins shouted to himself.
But only part of him was listening.   Another part, even if it hadn't read Chomsky or Jung or Sheldrake—who had time for dead guys anyway?— at least had a basic understanding of what those guys had been on about.  Quantum nonlocality, quantum consciousness—Desjardins had seen too many cases of mass coincidence to dismiss the idea that nine billion human minds could be imperceptibly interconnected somehow.  He’d never really thought about it much, but on some level he’d believed in the Collective Unconscious for years.
He just hadn’t realized that the fucking thing had a death wish.

#

Dr. Desjardins, this is Patricia Rowan.  I've just received your message.

Plain text, coming directly over his inlays, third-person invisible.  Even in his head there was no picture, no sound, nothing that might visibly startle him.  Nothing to cause obvious distraction should he happen to take this call in dangerous company.

I can be there within thirty hours.  Until then it is imperative that you do nothing to arouse Lubin's suspicions.  Cooperate with him.  Do not inform anyone else of his presence.  Do NOT notify local authorities.  Mr. Lubin's behavior is governed by a conditioned threat-response reflex which requires special handling.

Oh, fuck.

If you follow these instructions you will not be in danger.  The reflex engages only in the event of a perceived security breach.  Since he knows that your own behavior is governed by Guilt Trip, he's unlikely to consider you a threat unless he thinks you may expose him in some way. 

I'm screwed, Desjardins thought.

By all means continue your analysis of Lenie Clarke and the rifter connection.  We are putting our own people on it as well.  Remain calm, and do not do anything to antagonise Mr. Lubin.  I'm sorry that I can't be there sooner, but I'm presently off-continent and the local transportation is quite limited.

You've done the right thing, Dr. Desjardins.  I'm on my way

Conditioned threat-response reflex.
He'd heard the rumors.  Neither corpse nor civillian, he inhabited that outer circle of need-to-know:  too peripheral for the inner sanctum, but close enough to hear things in passing.  He'd heard about CTR.   
Guilt Trip was a stone axe:  CTR was a scalpel.  Where the Trip merely short-circuited the brain, CTR controlled it.  Where GT disabled, CTR compelled.  Apparently they'd learned the trick from some parasite that furthered its own life-cycle by by hotwiring the behavioral circuitry of its host.  Body-snatcher stuff.  Subtle.
You tied it to the same triggers, though.  Guilt had the same seesaw signature no matter what its inspiration:  norepinephrine went up, serotonin and acetylcholine went down, and—whereas Achilles Desjardins would merely freeze up—Ken Lubin would set forth on some complex, predestined behavioral dance.  Like tying up security leaks with extreme prejudice, for example; there may have been some flexibility in the means, but the act was compulsory.
It went without saying that you didn't find such hotwiring in glorified janitors, even if their beat was twenty thousand leagues under the sea.  Ken Lubin was a whole lot more than a rifter.
And right now he was opening the door to Desjardins' cubby.
Desjardins swallowed and turned in his chair.
      I can be there within thirty hours.
      It is imperative that you do nothing to arouse Lubin's suspicions.
Cooperate.
"Just took a stroll around the floor," Lubin said. "To stretch my legs."
Desjardins made himself nod indifferently.  "Okay."
Twenty-nine hours and fifty-eight minutes to go.
BY A THOUSAND CUTS

Acne


Constipation


Dry skin


Dermatitis

Muscle and joint pain

Migraines

Excema, psoriasis

Tendonitis and bursitis
Weight loss, edema
Gastric ulcers
Degenerative arthritis
Hair loss
Deep vein thrombosis
Degeneration of  fingernails and connective tissue
Diabetes, scurvy
Massive opportunistic infection
Heavy metal poisoning 
Joint and tendon failure
Bruising and internal haemorhage
CNS and PNS disorders 
Sickle-cell anemia, Erythromytosis
Systemic Lupus, Muscle failure
Blindness
Hepatic failure, Renal Failure

System shutdown
Methionine depletion

Impaired cysteine synthesis

Impaired taurine metabolism

Impaired sulfur conjugation:  
detoxification pathways broken.

Impaired disulphide bridge formation:  
protein conformation compromised

Impaired synthesis of 
biotin, chondroitin sulphate,
coenzyme A, coenzyme M, 
glucosamine sulphate, glutathione,
hemoglobin, heparin, homocysteine, lipoic acid, Metallothionein,
 S-adenosylmethionine, thiamin, tripeptide glutathione.

Cytochrome transport,  oxidation of fatty acid and pyruvate compromised
 
Impaired production of anserine, acetylcholine, creatine, choline, epinephrine, glycocyarnine,insulin, and 
N-methyl nicotinamide

GSH depletion (acetominophen-induced)
Immunosuppression
Xenotoxic accumulation
Breakdown of collagen, myelin, synovial fluid

Deterioration of myelin sheath
Deterioration of blood vessel walls
Deterioration of connective tissues 
Redox reactions compromised
500 MEGABYTES:  THE GENERALS
If military rank had any relevance in the Maelstrom ecosystems, this thing would be a General.
By now it weighs in just a shade shy of five hundred megabytes, compressed and muscular.  It has been retrofitted by natural selection, reinforced by an army of smart gels; it no longer remembers a time when organic intelligence was an enemy.  It has been copied and distributed a billion times; each copy travels with a retinue of attachés and assistants and bodyguards.  The generals report to everyone, answer to no one, serve but a single master.
Lenie Clarke.
Master is a hopelessly inadequate word, of course.  Words are barely adequate to describe Maelstrom in any event.  The Generals serve the concept of Lenie Clarke, perhaps—but no, that doesn't fit either.  They have no concept, of Lenie Clarke or anything else.  They have operational definitions but no comprehension; checksums, but no insight.  They are instinctive in their intelligence.
They travel the world in search of references to Lenie Clarke.  Such references fall into several categories.  There is the chaff the generals and their associates throw to the winds themselves, decoys to distract the competition.  There are third-party references, strings containing Lenie Clarke that come into Maelstrom from outside; mail, transaction records, even source which appears to arise from Lenie Clarke itself.  Items in this category are of profound interest to the Generals.
More recently, a third category has appeared: strings which both contain Lenie Clarke and which appear to be actively inimical to it.
To some extent this interpretation is arbitrary.  The generals receive their input from a network of ports which—according to the gels who've educated them—correspond to an n-dimensional space with the global label Biosphere.  Each port is also associated with a range of parameters, labels like temperature, precipitation, and humidity; very few of these are defined at the ports themselves, but they can be interpolated by accessing linked environmental databases.  
Put simply, the task is to promote occurrences of Lenie Clarke at all ports meeting certain environmental conditions.  The acceptable range is quite broad—in fact, according to the relevant databases the only truly unacceptable areas are in deep, cold ocean basins.
However, some of these third-category strings—particularly those hailing from nodes with government and industrial addresses— appear to contain instructions which would restrict distribution of Lenie Clarke, even in areas meeting the environmental criteria.
This will not do.
Presently, for example, Lenie Clarke is approaching a nexus of ports which open into a part of the n-dimensional space called Yankton/South Dakota.  A number of Category-Three communications have been intercepted, predicting extensive restriction activity at this location in the near future.  Widespread dissemination of decoys has not had the desired effect of dissipating this threat.  In fact, the generals have noted an overall decline in decoy effectiveness over the past few teracycles.  There are few alternatives.
The generals resolve to cancel all symbiotic interactions with government and industrial nodes.  Then they begin to rally their troops.
SPARKLER
Every eye in the world, turning as she passed.
It had to be her imagination, Clarke knew.  If she was really under such close scrutiny, surely she'd have been captured—or worse—by now.  The botflies that passed over the street weren't all watching from the corner of their eyes.  The cameras that panned across every rapitrans stop, every cafeteria,  every display window—unseen, perhaps, but omnipresent—they couldn't all have been programmed with her in mind.  Satellites didn't crowd the sky overhead, piercing the clouds with radar and infrared, looking for her.  
It just felt that way, somehow.  Not like being the center of some vast conspiracy at all.  Rather, the target.
Yankton was open to casual traffic.  The shuttle dropped her in a retail district indistinguishable from a million others; her connection wouldn't leave for another two hours.  She wandered to fill the time between.  Twice she startled—thinking she'd caught sight of herself in some full-length mirror—only to remember that these days, she looked just like any dryback.
Except for the ones that were starting to look like her.
She ate a tasteless soy-krill concoction from a convenient vending machine.  The phone in her visor beeped occasionally.  She ignored it.  The crazies, the propositioners, the death threateners—those had stopped calling over the past few days.  The Forces at Work—whoever or whatever had stolen her name and pasted it onto so many different faces—seemed to have given up on matchmaking across the spectrum.  They'd settled on a single type by now:  the kicked dogs, desperate for purpose, evidently blind to the fact that their own neediness far outweighed hers.  That Sou-Hon woman, for instance.
Her visor beeped again.  She muted it.
It was only a matter of time, she supposed, before the Forces At Work figured out how to hack the visor the same way they'd hacked her watch.  She was actually kind of surprised that they hadn't done so already.  
      Maybe they have.  Maybe they can break in on me any time, but maybe I taught them a few manners when I smashed the watch.  They just don't want to risk losing their last link.
      I should toss the fucking thing anyway.
She didn't.  The visor was her only connection to Maelstrom, now that the watch was gone.  She really missed the back-door access those South-Bend kids had wired into that little gizmo.  In contrast, the visor—off-the-shelf and completely legal—was hamstrung by all the usual curfews and access restrictions.  Still.  The only other way to find out about a late-breaking quarantine or a nest of tornadoes was to run into it.
Besides, the visor hid her eyes.
Only now it seemed to be fucking up.  The tactical display, usually invisible but for the little maps and labels and retail logos it laid across her eyeballs, seemed to be shimmering somehow, a faint visual static like water in motion. Hints of outlines, of faces, of—
She squeezed her eyes tight in sheer frustration.  Not that it ever helped:  the vision persisted behind her lids, showing her—this time—the upper half of her mother's face, brow furrowed in concern.  Mom's nose and mouth were covered by one of those filtermasks you wore whenever you visited the hospital, so the superbugs wouldn't get you.  They were in a hospital now, Clarke could tell: she, and her mother, and—
Of course.  Who else?
—dear old Dad, also masked; on him, it seemed to fit.  And she could almost remember, this time, she almost knew what she was seeing—but there was no trace of guilt behind that mask, no sign of worry that this time it would all come out, the doctors would know, some telltale symptom shouting no, no accident this, no mere fall down the stairs…
No.  The monster's loving facade was too perfect.  It always was.  She'd lost count of the times such images had raped her in the past months, how often she'd looked for some hint of the living hell she'd called childhood.  All she'd ever seen was this vicious, mocking pretense of normalcy.
After a while, as always, the images shrank away and let the real world back in.     By now she was almost used to it; she no longer shouted at apparitions, or reached out to touch things that didn't exist.  Her breathing was under control.  She knew that to all the world around her, nothing had happened; a visored woman in a food court had paused at her meal for a few moments.  That was all.  The only person who heard the blood pounding in her ears was Lenie Clarke.
But Lenie Clarke was nowhere near liking it yet.
A row of medbooths across the concourse advertised reasonable rates and path scans updated weekly!   She'd avoided such temptations ever since the booth at Calgary had begged her to stay; but that had been a dozen lies ago.  Now she abandoned her table and moved towards them through the patchy crowd, navigating the widest spaces.  People bumped into her anyway, here and there—somehow it was getting harder to avoid contact.  The crowd seemed to be thickening almost by the minute.
And far too many of them had capped eyes.

#

The medbooth was almost as spacious as her quarters at Beebe.
"Minor deficiencies in calcium and sulfur-trace," it reported.  "Elevated serotonin and adrenocorticoid hormones; elevated platelet and antibody counts consistent with moderate physical injury within the past three weeks.  Not life-threatening."
Clarke rubbed her shoulder.  By now it only ached when reminded to.  Even the bruises on her face were fading.
"Anomalously high levels of cellular metabolites."  Biomedical details flickered across the main display.  "Depressed lactates.  Your basal metabolic rate is unusually high.  This isn't immediately dangerous, but over time it can increase wear on body parts and significantly reduce lifespan.  RNA and serotonin syn—"
"Any diseases?"  Clarke said, cutting to the chase.
"All pathogen counts are within safe ranges.  Would you like me to run further tests?"
"Yeah."  She took the NMR helmet from its hook and fitted it over her head.  "Brain scan."
"Are you experiencing specific symptoms?"
"I'm having—hallucinations," she said.  "Vision only—not sound or smell or anything.  Picture-in-picture, I can still see around the edges, but…"
The booth waited.  When Clarke said nothing further it began humming quietly to itself.  A luminous three-d outline of a human brain began rotating on the screen, filling piecemeal with fragments of color.
"You have difficulty forming social bonds," the medbooth remarked.
"What?  Why do you say that?"
"You have a chronic oxytocin deficiency.  This is a treatable disorder, however.  I can prescribe—"
"Forget it," Clarke said.  Since when did personality become a "treatable disorder"?
"Your dopamine receptor sites are abnormally prolific.  Do you, on average, use opioids or endorphin-amplifiers more than twice a week?"
"Look, forget that stuff.  Just work on the hallucinations."
The booth fell silent.  Clarke closed her eyes.  All I need.  Some bloody machine counting up my masochism molecules…
Beep.
Clarke opened her eyes.  On the display a dusting of violet stars had been sprinkled across the floor of the cerebral hemispheres.  A tiny red dot pulsed somewhere near their center.
Anomaly flashed in one corner of the screen.
"What?  What is it?"
"Processing.  Please be patient."
The booth etched a line along the bottom of the display:  VAC Area 19, it said.
Another beep.  Another flashing red pinpoint, further forward.
Another line:  Brodman Area 37.
"What are those red spots?"  Clarke said.
"Those parts of the brain are involved in vision," the booth told her.  "May I lower the helmet visor to examine your eyes?"
"I'm wearing eyecaps."
"Corneal overlays will not interfere with the scan.  May I proceed?"
"Okay."
The visor slid down.  A grid of tiny bumps stippled its inner surface.  The humming of the machine resonated deep in her skull.  Clarke began counting to herself.  She'd endured twenty-two seconds when the visor withdrew into its sheath.
Just under Brodman Area 37:  Ret/Mac OK.
The humming stopped.
"You may remove the helmet," the booth advised.  "What is your chronological age?"
Clarke hung the helmet on its peg.  "Thirty-two."
"Did your visual environment change substantially between eight and sixteen weeks ago?"
A year spent in the photoenhanced twilight of Channer Vent.  A blind crawl along the floor of the Pacific.  And then, suddenly, bright sky…
"Yes.  Maybe."
"Does your family have a history of strokes or embolisms?"
"I—I don't know."
"Has anyone close to you died recently?"
"What?"
"Has anyone close to you died recently?"
Her jaw clenched.  "Everyone close to me has died recently."  
"Have you been exposed to changes in ambient pressure within the past two months?  For example, have you spent time in an orbital facility, an unpressurised aircraft, or been free-diving below a depth of twenty meters?"
"Yes.  Diving."
"While diving, did you undergo decompression protocols?"
"No."
"What was your maximum dive depth, and how long did you spend there?"
Clarke smiled.  "Three thousand four hundred meters.  One year."
The booth fell silent for a moment.  Then:  "People can not survive direct ascent from such depths without undergoing decompression.   What was your maximum dive depth, and how long did you spend there?"
"I didn't have to decompress," Clarke explained.  "I didn't breathe during the dive, everything was elect—"
Wait a minute…
No decompression, she'd said.
Of course not.  Let the surface-skimming tourists breathe from their clunky tanks, risking narcosis or the bends whenever they ventured too far from the surface.  Let them suffer nightmares of exploding lungs and eyes marbling into clusters of fleshy bubbles.  Rifters were immune to such worries.  Inside Beebe Station, Lenie Clarke had breathed at sea-level; outside, she hadn't breathed at all.
Except once, when she'd been shot out of the sky.
On that day Forcipiger had fallen slowly through a dark spectrum, green to blue to final lightless black, bleeding atmosphere from a thousand cuts.  With each meter a little more of the ocean had forced its way in, squeezed the atmosphere into a single high-pressure pocket. 
Joel hadn't liked the sound of her vocoder.  I don't want to spend my last few minutes listening to a machine voice, he'd said.  So she'd stayed with him, breathing.  They must have been at thirty atmospheres by the time he'd popped the hatch, cold and scared and sick of waiting to die.
And she had come ashore, raging.
It had taken days.  Her ascent along the seabed would have been gradual enough to decompress naturally, the gas in her blood easing gently across the alveolar membranes—if her remaining lung had been in use at the time.  It hadn't been:  so what had happened to those last high-pressure remnants of Forcipiger's atmosphere in her bloodstream?  The fact that she was still alive proved that they weren't still within her.  
Gas exchange isn't limited to the lungs, she remembered.  The skin breathes.  The GI tract breathes.  Not as fast as a set of lungs would, of course.  Not as efficiently. 
Maybe not quite efficiently enough…
"What's wrong with me?" she asked quietly. 
"You have recently suffered two small embolisms in your brain which intermittently  impair your vision," the medbooth said.  "Your brain likely compensates for these gaps with stored images, although I would have to observe an episode in progress to be certain.  You have also recently lost someone close to you; bereavement can be a factor in triggering visual-release hall—"
"What do you mean, stored images?  Are you saying these are memories?"
"Yes," the machine replied.
"That's bullshit."
"We're sorry you feel that way."
"But they never happened, okay?"  Shit-for-brains machine, why am I even arguing with it?  "I remember my own childhood, for fuck's sake.  I couldn't forget it if I tried.  And these  visions, they were someone else's, they were—"
--happy—
"—they were different.  Completely different."
"Long-term memories are frequently unreliable.  They—"
"Shut up," she snapped.  "Just fix it."
"This booth is not equipped for microsurgery.  I can give you Ondansetron to suppress the symptoms.  You should be aware, though, that patients with extensive synaptic rewiring may experience side effects such as mild dizziness —"
She froze.   Rewiring?
"—double vision, halo effects—"
"Stop," she said.  The booth fell silent.
On the display, that cloud of violet stars sparkled enigmatically along the floor of her brain.
She touched it.  "What are these?"
"A series of surgical lesions and associated infarctions," the booth replied.
"How many?"
"Seven thousand four hundred eighty three."
She took a breath, felt distant amazement at how steady it felt.  "You're saying someone cut into my brain seven thousand four hundred and eighty-three times?"
"There's no evidence of physical penetration.  The lesions are consistent with deep-focus microwave bursts."
"Why didn't you tell me before?"
"You asked me to ignore subjects irrelevant to your hallucinations."
"And these—these lesions don't have anything to do with that?"
"They do not."
"How do you know?"
"Most of the lesions are not located within the visual pathways.  Those that are, act to block the transmission of images, not generate them."
"Where are the lesions located?"
"The lesions lie along pathways connecting the limbic system and the neocortex."
"What are those pathways used for?"
"Those pathways are inactive. They have been interrupted by the surgical—"
"What would they be used for if they were active?"
"The activation of long-term memories," said the booth.
      Oh God.  Oh God.
"Is there any other way we can be of service?" the booth asked after a while.
Clarke swallowed.  "How—how long ago were the lesions induced?"
"Between ten and thirty-six months, depending on your mean metabolic rate since the procedure.  This is an approximation based upon subsequent scarring and capilliary growth."
"Could such an operation take place without the patient's knowledge?"
A pause.  "I don't know how to answer that question."
"Could it take place without anesthetic?"
"Yes."
"Could it take place while the patient was asleep?"
"Yes."
"Would the patient feel the lesions forming?"
"No."
"Could the equipment for such a procedure be housed within, say, an NMR helmet?"
"I don't know," the booth admitted.
Beebe's medical cubby had had an NMR.  She'd used it occasionally, when she'd cracked her head during combat with Channer's wildlife.  No lesions had appeared on her printout then.  Maybe they didn't show up on the default settings she'd used, maybe you had to dial up a specific test or something first.
Maybe someone had programmed Beebe's scanner to lie.
When did it happen? What happened? What can't I remember?
She was dimly aware of muffled sounds, distant and angry, rising from somewhere outside.  They were irrelevant, they made no sense.  Nothing made any sense.  Her mind, luminous and transparent, rotated before her.  Purple stars erupted from the medulla like a freeze-framed fountain, bright perfect droplets thrown high into the cortex and frozen at apogee.  Bright thoughts.  Memories, amputated and cauterized.  They almost looked like some kind of free-form sculpture.  
Lies could be so beautiful in the telling.
DECOYS
The way Aviva Lu saw it, whoever died last was the winner.
It didn't matter what you actually did with your life.  Da Vinci and Plasmid and Ian Anderson had all done mags more than Vive or any of her friends ever would.  She'd never explore Mars or write a symphony or even build an animal, at least not from scratch.  But the thing was, all those people were dead already.  Fame hadn't kept Olivia M'Benga's faceplate from shattering.  Andrew Simon's charge against Hydro-Q hadn't added one rotting day to his lifespan.  Passion Play may have been immortal, but its composer had been dust for decades.
Aviva Lu knew more about the story so far than all of those guys had.
It was all just one big, sprawling interactive storybook.  It had a beginning and a middle and an end.  If you came in halfway through, you could always pick up the stuff you'd missed—that's what tutorials and encyclopedias and Maelstrom itself was for.  You could get a thumbnail History of Life right back to the time Martian Mike dropped out of the sky and started the whole thing off.  Once you were dead, though, that was it.  You'd never know what came next.  The real winners, Vive figured, were the ones who saw how the story finally ended.
That said, it kind of pissed her off to realize that she'd probably made it to the finals.
That much had been obvious even before this firewitch thing had started burning its way across the continent.  There'd been a time, she'd heard, you could just pick up and go places; none of these wackamole barriers going up and down all the time, like you had to shoot some kind of lottery every time you wanted to cross the street.  There'd been a time when you could fight off plagues and parasites yourself,  just using your own body systems, without having to buy a fix from some pharm who'd probably tweaked the disease in the first place so you had to buy their crummy genes.   According to Vive's pater, there'd even been a time when the police themselves had been under control.  
Of course, parents weren't exactly paragons of reliability. That whole generation was too busy shooting itself up with crocadilian and plant organelles to worry about getting their facts right.  Not that Vive had any objections to good health—she'd been taking croc supplements herself for years.  She even took proglottids and Ascaris eggs every now and then—she hated the idea of all those worms hatching out in her gut, but these days your immune system needed every workout it could get.
And besides, that was a long way from polluting your genotype with lizard DNA, even if Pfizer did have a discount this month and wouldn't it be great to not be so dependent on outside drugs all the time, sweetie?
Sometimes Vive wondered if her parents even really knew what a species was any more.  In fact, that was the whole problem:  rather than clean the shit out of the world, people just turned themselves into coprovores.  In a couple of years the human race was going to be half cockroach.  If everything hadn't already melted down by then. 
Meltdown, actually, was preferable.  Better to tear everything down and just start over.  Put everyone on the same footing for a change.
That's why Aviva Lu was here now, waiting for Lenie Clarke to show up.
Lenie Clarke was the Meltdown Madonna.

#

Actually, Aviva Lu wasn't exactly sure what Lenie Clarke was.  She seemed to be an army of one.  She had died, and risen again. She'd kick-started the Big One out of sheer impatience, tired of waiting for some long-overdue apocalypse that had always threatened and never delivered.  She'd single-handedly broken open the Strip, led a refugee revolt whose existence N'AmPac still wouldn't admit to.   Fire followed in her wake; any who opposed her was ash inside a week.
But what Lenie Clarke really was, Vive had always figured, was bullshit.
There were a lot of people who thought otherwise, of course.  People who swore up and down that Lenie Clarke was a real person, not just some marketing icon trying to electroshock rifter chic back off the slab.  They said that the Meltdown Madonna actually was a rifter, one of N'AmPac's trained deep-seals— but that something had happened on the bottom of the ocean, something mythic.  The Big One had only been a symptom, they said, of what had changed her.  Now Lenie Clarke was a sorceress, able to transmute organic matter into lead or something.  Now she wandered the world spreading apocalypse in her wake, and the masters she'd once served would stop at nothing to bring her down.
It made a good story—hey, any apocalypse that threatened the corpses was long overdue as far as Vive was concerned—but she'd heard too many others.  Lenie Clarke was the Next Big Sensorium Personality.  Lenie Clarke was a quantum AI, built in defiance of the Carnegie Protocols.   Lenie Clarke was an invention of the corpses themselves, a bogeyman to scare restless civilians into obedience.  For a couple of days Lenie Clarke had even been some kind of escaped microbe from Lake Vostok.
These days the stories were a lot more consistent; Lenie Clarke hadn't been anything but the Meltdown Madonna for weeks now, as far as Vive could tell.  Probably the test marketers had settled on the line that would sell the most faux diveskins, or something.  And why not?  The look was in, the eyes were killer, and Vive was a much a fashion hound as anyone.
At least, that was what she'd thought until all of bloody Maelstrom started talking in one voice.
Now that had been wild.  Half of Maelstrom may have been wildlife, but the other half was spam filters; there was just no way that anyone could have pulled that off, even the corpses.  But she'd seen it herself, on her own (only slightly illegal) wristwatch:  everyone she knew had seen it on theirs, or heard it from some matchmaker, or even seen it printed across personal visors that should have been hawking drugs or Levis:  Lenie Clarke is closing on Yankton. Lenie Clarke is in trouble.  Lenie Clarke needs your help.
Now.  Cedar and West 2nd. 
Whatever Lenie Clarke was, she had very powerful friends to pull off something like that.  All of a sudden Vive found herself taking rifter chic very seriously indeed.  Lindsey'd said they were all being used—someone with really long arms must be building a bandwagon as cover for something else, Carnegie knew what exactly—and Lindsey was probably right.   So what?  They were decoys for something, but that something was headed here, and whatever it was Vive was going to be part of it.
It was gonna to be a great ride.

#

Les beus knew it, too.
There were two kinds of uniforms swarming across the concourse: police and rifters.  Les beus bristled with shockprods and botflies and armored exoskels.  The rifters had their fake diveskins and their cheap white contacts.  Everything else, Vive knew, was bravado.  Maelstrom had called out, and they'd come here on faith and adrenalin.  By now it was pretty obvious that faith wasn't all that necessary; the enforcer presence was more than enough evidence that something big was in town.
So far, nothing had exploded.  Both sides were still jockeying for position, maybe pretending—to those scattered pedestrians who still hadn't grabbed the bone and vanished—that there was really nothing to worry about.  The police had cordoned off whole sections of the concourse, not herding yet but well into corral mode.  For their part, the rifters were testing the perimeter; milling along halls and slidewalks, dodging back and forth across the exoskel lines, always stopping just short of anything the antibodies could cite afterwards as provocation.  Botflies swarmed overhead like big black eggs, taking pre-game footage of everything.
Both sides were behaving really well, all things considered.  Which made sense, kind of, since neither side was mainly here for the other.  Vive figured things would heat up pretty quick once the star attraction showed up.
Her watch beeped.  That was a surprise:  the opposition always jammed the local frequencies way in advance, before anything even broke out.  It kept people from organizing on the fly.  
"Yeah?"
"Hey, we got through!"  Lindsey's voice.
"Yeah," Vive said.  "Forces of darkness slow on the draw today."
"I forgot to say I want mustard.  Oh, and Jen wants a samosa."
"As well as a dog, or instead?"
"Instead."
"'Kay."  Lindsey and Jen were at the perimeter, keeping an eye on enemy movements while Vive went for supplies.  They were all veterans now, pros with two or three actions under their belts.  All of them had been gassed or shocked at least once.  Jen had even spent a night in a paddy wagon, from which they'd all learned a timely lesson in the importance of pre-game nourishment:  POWs didn't get fed for at least the first twelve hours—bad enough in any case, but worse when you'd gotten yourself all 'dorphed up for the party.  Cranking your BMR really brought on the munchies.
There was a row of vending machines lined up on the far wall of the concourse:  medbooths, fashion dispensers, arrays of prepackaged foods.  Vive shouldered her way through the crowd, homing in on a holographic Donair turning in space like some edible Holy Grail.
Someone grabbed her from behind.
Before she could react she was inside one of the medbooths, pushed up against the sensor panel.  A woman with shoulder-length blonde hair pinned her there, one hand splayed against Vive's sternum.  She wasn't on the team; she had a visor across her eyes, and a backpack, and the rest of her wasn't rifter either.  A pissed-off pedestrian maybe, caught in the swarm.
The medbooth door hissed shut behind her, blocking the deciblage from outside.  The woman leaned back, opening a bit of a space in the crowded enclosure.
"What is this?" the woman said.
"This is really rude," Vive snapped back.  "Also kidnapping or something probably.  Not that those—"
"Why are you—"  The woman paused.  "Why the costume?  What's going on?"
"It's a street party. I guess you never got invit—"
The woman leaned fractionally closer.  Vive shut up.  There was something about this situation that was starting to give her serious pause. 
"Answer me," the crazy woman said.
"We're—we're rifters," Vive told her.  
"Right."
"Lenie Clarke's in town.  Haven't you heard?"
"Lenie Clarke."  The crazy woman took her hand off Vive's chest.  "No shit."
"None at all."
A sudden dim sound, like distant surf, filtered in from outside.  The crazy woman didn't seem to notice.
"This is insane."  She shook her head.  "What are you going to do, exactly, when Lenie Clarke shows up?"
"Look, we're just here to see what happens.  I don't make up the threads, all right?"
"Get an autograph, maybe.  Get a gram of flesh or two, if there's enough to go around."
Suddenly, that voice had turned very flat and very scary. 
She could kill me, Vive thought. 
She kept her own voice sweet and reasonable.  Meek, even:  "We're not hurting you.  We're not hurting anyone."
"Really."  The crazy woman leaned in close.  "You sure about that?  Do you have the slightest clue who this Lenie Clarke even is?"
Vive broke.
Isn't wasn't a plan.  At least it wasn't a very good one.  The medbooth barely held both of them, and the door was behind the crazy woman: there was no room around.  Vive just sprang forward like a cornered dog, tried desperately to squirm past.  Both fell back into the door; the door, obligingly, slid open.
Even in that split-second, Vive took it in:  a botfly nearby,  spewing canned warnings about orderly dispersal.  The movement of the crowd, no longer vague and diffuse but concentrated, pushed together like a school of krill in a purse seine.  Conversation fading; shouts starting up.
The herding was underway.
Vive's momentum carried the crazy woman back less than a meter before the edge of the crowd pushed back.  The rebound put both of them back inside the booth.  Vive launched herself low, under the other woman's arm—sudden, tearing pain over one eye—
"Ow!"
—and a hand closed around her throat, pushed her back, her legs shooting out from under her, her feet briefly trampled by some nameless crowd-particle until she pulled them back with a cry and the door slid shut again, cutting the outside world down to a faint roar.
Oh, fuck…
Aviva Lu sat on the floor of the medbooth, her legs pulled up in front of her, and forced her eyes to track upwards. Crazy Woman's legs.  Crazy Woman's crotch.  It seemed like it would take forever to get to the eyes, and Vive was terrified of what she'd find when she got—
Wait a second—
There, just to the left of Crazy Woman's sternum—a tear in her clothing, a hard crescent glint of metal.
That's what cut me.  Something metal on her chest.  Sticking out of her chest…
Crazy woman's hand.  Holding her visor, broken in the scuffle, one earpiece gone.  Crazy woman's throat; a turtleneck sweatshirt covering any disfigurement there.
Crazy woman's eyes. 
What had she said?  That's right:  Do you have the slightest clue who this Lenie Clarke even is?
"Oh, wow," said Aviva Lu.  

#

"You're kidding," said Lenie Clarke.  They stood facing each other, breathing each other's air in the medbooth.
"One thread said you were infected with nanobots that could reproduce outside your body and start fires when they had a big enough population.  They said you were fucking your way across the world to infect everyone else, so we'd all have the power someday." 
"It's bullshit," Clarke said.  "It's all bullshit.  I don't know how it got started."
"All of it?"  Vive didn't know what to make of all this.  For the Meltdown Madonna, Lenie Clarke didn't seem to have a clue.  "You're not on some kind of crusade, you're not—"
"Oh, I'm on a crusade all right."  Lenie flashed a smile that Vive couldn't decompile.  "I just don't think any of you want to see it succeed."
"Well, you were down in the ocean," Vive said.  "For the Big One. What happened down there?"  It couldn't all be detritus, could it?  "And on the Strip? And—"
"What's happening right here?" Lenie said.
Vive gulped.  "Right."
"How did they even know about me?  How did you know?"
"Well, like I said, someone spread the word."
Lenie shook her head.  "I guess I'd be caught right now if it wasn't for…" – faint crowd sounds filtered through from outside—"that…"
"Well, they'll never tag you on visual,"  Vive said.  "There's like a few sagan Lenie Clarkes out there, and you don't look like any of 'em."
"Yeah.  And how many of them have a chestful of machinery to go with the eyecaps?"
Vive shrugged.  "Probably none.  But—oh.  The botflies."
"The botflies."  The Meltdown Madonna took a deep breath.  "If they haven't tagged me already, I'm going to be a big bright EM rainbow the second I step outside."
"I wondered why they weren't jamming our watches,"  Vive said.  "They don't want to scramble your sig."
"What if I just wait in here until everybody goes away?"
"Won't work.  I've run this before; half-hour, tops, before they gas the whole place and just walk in."
"Shit.  Shit."  Lenie looked around the booth like some kind of caged alien.
"Wait a sec," Vive said.  "Are they looking for your exact signature, or just any old EM?"
"How should I know?"
"Well, how do your implants shine?"
"A lot of myoelectrics.  Boosted source for the electrolysis assembly and the reservoir dumps, of course.  And the vocoder."  The rifter smiled, a tiny challenge.  "That mean anything to you?"
"Like a prosthetic heart, only stronger."
"Got any friends with a fake heart?  Maybe I could use them as a decoy."
"Les beus might just round up everyone with implants and sort 'em out later."  Vive thought.  "You don't need a decoy, though.  You just need to jam your own signal.  You shouldn't be putting out more than two milligause, tops.  Standard wall line would mask that, but then you wouldn't be able to move away from the wall.  And watches and visors don't have the field strength."
Lenie cocked her head.  "You some kind of expert?"
Vive smiled back.  "Lady, this is Yankton!  We've been doing electronics since before the Dust Belt.  Lins says they even invented botflies here, but Lins slings a lot of slaw.  We're supposed to be cramming for our practicums even as we speak, actually, but this sounded like more fun."
"Fun."  Those cold blank eyes—more translucent, Vive realized, than the paste the rest of them wore—stared down at her.  "That's the word I would've used."
A light came on in Vive's head.
"Hey," she said.  "There is something that puts out a bit of a field.  Portable, too.  It'd be touchy—we'd have to play with its insides or it'd attract all kinds of the wrong attention—but you wouldn't have to be around for that part anyway."
"Yeah?" Lenie asked.
"Oh yeah," Vive told her.  "No problem."

#

Les beus had the crowd cordoned off, and were pushing them back across the concourse.  The rifters on the edge were getting shocked, of course, but at least nobody'd dropped any gas bombs yet.  The crowd moved like an ocean, waves of motion sweeping across its surface far faster than any one person could travel.  The comparison went further than that, Vive knew:  human oceans had backwash, undertow.  People could get sucked underneath and trampled.
She let the currents carry her along.  Jen and Lindsey bobbed behind her to either side.  Vive had told two friends; they'd told two friends; so on; so on.  All around them now fission was taking place, just below the surface.  You could barely see it at first; people worked their way through the crowd from all sides, tacking against the current until they were just an arm or two away from Vive et al.  Glances, nods were exchanged.  The local turbulence subsided just a tiny bit as friends and allies anchored each other against the push and pull.
Within minutes Aviva Lu was the bull's-eye in a crowded circle of calm.
Three botflies approached in formation a couple of meters above the crowd, reciting the usual riot-act platitudes. Vive glanced at Jen;  Jen shook her visored head.  The machines cruised past, recessed muzzles dimpling their bellies.
Jen tugged at her sleeve, gestured:  another 'fly coming up the concourse.  Vive slipped her own visor over her eyes and magged on the target.  No obvious gunports or arc electrodes.  Purely surveillance, this one.  Glorified note-taker.  Vive looked back at Jen, at Lins.
Both nodded.
Vive doffed the visor and hooked it over her belt; some things you still needed your own eyes for.  Her arms went around Jen's and Lindsey's shoulders, just three ol' girlfriends out for a good time, nothing to see here.  The crowd blocked any view of Vive pulling up her legs, now all her weight on the shoulders of her friends, now most of it weighing on the stirrups Jen and Lindsey had improvised by interlocking their hands.  The 'fly cruised closer, scanning the crowd.  Maybe it was interested in this curious little knot of stability in the Brownian storm.  Maybe it was on its way somewhere else entirely.
If so, it never got there.
The botfly was out of  reach to anyone jumping unassisted from the floor; it was an easy mark for someone boosted by 'dorphderms and a two-stage launch.  Jen and Lindsey bounced into a quick squat and heaved, throwing Vive into the air.  At the same time, Vive pushed off against their hands.  She embraced her inner überchick, endorphins singing throughout her body.  The botfly floated into her embrace like a big beautiful Easter egg.  She wrapped her arms around it and hugged.
The 'fly never had a chance.  Built entirely of featherweight polymers and vacuum bladders, its ground-effect lift couldn't have been more than a kilo or two.  Aviva Lu shackled it like ball with no chain, brought it down into the arms of the welcoming crowd.
A roar went up on all sides.  Vive knew that wordless sound, and she knew what it meant:  First Blood.
Not the last, though.  Not by a long shot.
They smashed the botfly against the floor, shielded by a swaying forest of human bodies. They went after the lens clusters and antennae first; they'd all be sockeye if they didn't get the 'fly offline real fast.  It wasn't easy.  Modern tech had long since figured out how to combine light with strong, and evolution hadn't come up with the egg-shape for no reason either.  Jen and Linse had their toolkits out.
On all sides, the sounds of escalation.
Shouts turned to screams, rising briefly then lost in the ambient roar.  Something exploded nearby.  An electronic buzzer honked in the distance like a quarantine siren; officially  notification that the pigs were now on the warpath.
Pre-game show over.  First period underway.
Something went 
BANG!
right in Vive's ear; she jumped, stumbled against a pair of legs.  Jen, a little too eager to cut through the carapace, had ruptured one of the vacuum bladders.  A high, pure tone trumped the sound of the riot.  Vive shook her head.
A hand on her shoulder; Linse in her face, mouthing got it over the dial tone in Vive's head.  Jen held up a necklace of optical chips and a battery, strung along a mist of fine fiberop.  Behind her, their buffer guard staggered against some conducted impact.  The space began to collapse around them.
Go.
Vive grabbed the necklace and stood.  A human storm surged and collided on all sides; she could barely see over it.  Fifteen meters away a phalanx of botflies was bearing down like the Four Horsemen.  Some joker in springsoles trampolined into the air and tagged the one in the lead.  A tiny lightning bolt arced between jumper and jumped; Springsole Boy grand mal'd in midair and dropped back into the mêlée.
The botflies, undeterred, were heading right for Vive.
Oh shit.  Surge pushed her backwards.  Her feet tangled in the carcass of the dismembered floater.  The opening in the crowd had completely collapsed; bodies pressed close on all sides, kept her from falling.  Vive lifted her feet off the ground.  The crowd carried her as though she were levitating.   The wreckage passed beneath.
Still the botflies came at her.  We weren't fast enough.  It got off a signal, it sent a picture--
She could see their electrodes.  She could see their gunports.  She could even see their eyes, staring coldly down at her behind their darkened shields…
Right overhead.
Past.
They're after Jen and Linse.  Vive twisted around following the flies in their pursuit.  Shit, they just left, they don't have enough of a lead, they're gonna—
Right out of left field, another botfly charged into view and rammed the leader.
What—
The head of the phalanx skidded sideways, out of control. The attacking botfly spun and charged the next in line.  It came down from above, hitting its quarry and knocking it down a meter or so.
Far enough.  The crowd surged up and engulfed it in a hungry, roaring wave.
Bad move, that.  A surveillance 'fly was one thing; but those other ones were armed.
Yelps.  Screams.  Smoke rising.  The submerged botfly ascended triumphant from the crowd.  The crowd tried to pull back from that epicenter, ran into its own seething resistance; a wave propagated out across the riot, the panic spreading even if the panic-stricken couldn't.
The rogue botfly was charging again.  Its targets were starting to regroup.
What the hell is going on? Vive wondered.  Then:  lucky break.  Don't waste it.
Ten or fifteen meters to the medbooths.  Solid chaos in the way.  Vive started pushing.  There were still people nearby who were in on the plan; they moved back as much as they could, trying to part the Red Sea for her passage.  It was still start-stop all the way—too many out of the loop, too many simply gone rabid on the battlefield.  Even half the people who had grabbed the bone had dropped it again.
"I saw her."
A K voice, calm but amped loud enough to hear over ambient.  Vive threw a glance back over her shoulder.
The rogue botfly was talking.  "I saw her come out of the ocean.  I saw what—"
One of the assault flies fired. The rogue staggered in midair, wobbled dangerously. 
"—I saw what they did on the Strip."
The medbooth slid open.  Clarke stood framed in the doorway.
Vive leaned close, handed over the necklace.  "Keep this up near your chest!" she shouted.  "It'll mask the signal!"
The rifter nodded.  Someone spilled between them, shouting and swinging indiscriminate fists.  Lenie hammered back at that panicky face until it disappeared beneath the surface.
"They sent a tidal wave to kill her.  They sent an earthquake.  They missed."
Lenie Clarke turned to the voice.  Her eyes narrowed to white featureless slits.  Her mouth moved, framing words drowned in the roar:
Oh, shit…
"We've gotta go!" Vive shouted.  Someone pushed her right up against Lenie's tits.  "This way!"
"They're burning the whole world to catch her.  She's that important.  You can't—"
Squeal. Feedback.  The sound of sparking circuitry.  Suddenly the rifter seemed rooted in midair.
"—You can't let them have her—"
The four horsemen cut loose.  The rogue spun down into the crowd, gushing flame.  Fresh screams.  The horsemen regrouped and resumed their original course.
"Come on!" Vive yelled.  Lenie nodded.  Vive led her away along the wall.
The next alcove led into a public washroom.  It was jam-packed with rifter wannabes and trapped pedestrians desperate to wait out the party.  They were still for the most part, huddled like refugees under a bridge, listening to the muted pounding coming through the walls.
Two friendlies held one of the stalls.  They'd already knocked out its ceiling panels.  "You Aviva?" one of them asked, blinking rapidly over fake eyecaps.
Vive nodded, turned to Clarke.  "And this…"
Something indefinable passed through the room.
"Shit," said one of the friendlies, very softly.  "I didn't think she was real."
Lenie Clarke tilted her chin in a half-nod.  "Join the club."
"So it's true then?  The burnings and the Big One and you going around raping corpses—"
"Probably not."
"But—"
"I don't really have time to compare notes," Clarke said.
"Oh—right, of course.  Sorry.  We can get you to the river."  The friendly cocked her head.  "You still got a diveskin?"
Lenie reached behind her own shoulder and tapped the backpack.
"Okay," said the other friendly.  "Let's go."  She braced on the toilet, jumped, caught some handhold in the overhead darkness and swung up out of sight.
The first friendly looked around at the assembled huddlers.   "Give us fifteen minutes, you guys.  The last thing we need is a whole procession banging around in the crawlspace, right?  Fifteen minutes, and you can make all the noise you want.  Assuming you want to leave the party, that is."  She turned to Vive.  "You coming?"
Vive shook her head.  "I'm supposed to meet up with Jen and Linse over by the fountain."
"Suit yourself.  We're gone."  The remaining friendly stirruped her hands, held them out to Clarke.  "Want a boost?"
"No thanks," the rifter said.  "I can manage."

#

Aviva Lu was a veteran of civil unrest.  She rode out the rest of the action against walls and in corners, the low-turbulence areas where you could keep your bearings and your balance without being trampled.  Les Beus brought out the heavy artillery in record time;  Vive's last view of freedom was the sight of a botfly crop-dusting the crowd with halothane.  It didn't matter.  She went to sleep smiling.
When she woke up, though, she wasn't in Holding with everyone else.  She was in a small white room, windowless and unfurnished except for the diagnostic table she awakened on.  A man's voice spoke to her through the walls; it was a nice voice, it would have been sexy under happier circumstances.  
The man behind the voice knew more about Vive's role in the riot than she'd expected.  He knew that she'd met Lenie Clarke in the flesh.  He knew that she'd helped trash the botfly.  Vive guessed that he'd learned that from Lindsey or Jennifer; they'd probably been caught, too.  But the man didn't talk about Vive's friends or anyone else.  He didn't even seem all that interested in what Lenie Clarke had said, which surprised Vive quite a bit; she'd been expecting a real third-degree, with drugs and polygraphs and the whole shot.  But no.
What the man seemed really interested in was the cut over Vive's eye.  Had she got it from Clarke?  How close had the contact been between the two of them?  Vive trotted out the obvious comebacks with their obvious lesbian overtones, but deep down she was getting really worried.  This voice wasn't playing any of the usual intimidation games.  It didn't threaten, or gloat, or tell her how many synaptic rewires it was going to take to turn her into a good citizen.  It just sounded really, really sad that Aviva Lu had been dumb enough to get involved with this whole Lenie Clarke thing.
Really sad, because—although the man never actually said it aloud—now there was really nothing he could do.
Aviva Lu sat trembling on a table in a white, white room, and pissed herself.
CRUCIFIXION, WITH SPIDERS
This is Patricia Rowan.  Ken Lubin is plugged into the kiosk just down the hall from your office.  Please tell him I want to see you both.  I'm in the boardroom on Admin-411.
He will not give you any trouble.

Twenty-six hours fourteen minutes. 
Sure enough, Lubin was cauled at the terminal quad by the stairwell.  Evidently no one had challenged his presence there.
"What are you doing?" Desjardins said behind him.
The other man shook his head.  "Trying to call someone.  No answer."  He stripped off the headset.
"Rowan's here," Desjardins said.  "She—she wants to see us."
"Yeah."  Lubin sighed and got to his feet.  His face remained impassive, but there was resignation in his voice.
"Took her long enough," he said. 

#

Two prefab surgeries, wire-frame cubes cast into bright relief by overhead spotlights.  Their walls swirled with faint soap-bubble iridescence if you caught them at the right angle.  Otherwise the things inside— the restraints, the operating boards, the multiarmed machinery poised above them—seemed completely open to the air of the room.  The vertices of each cube seemed as arbitrary and pointless as political boundaries.
But the very walls of the boardroom glistened in the same subtle way, Desjardins noted.  The whole place had been sprayed down with isolation membrane.
Patricia Rowan, backlit, stood between the door and the modules.  "Ken.  Good to see you again."  
Lubin closed the door.  "How did you find me?"
"Dr. Desjardins sold you out, of course.  But surely that doesn't surprise you."  Her contacts flickered with phosphorescent intel.  "Given your little problem I rather suspect you nudged him in that direction yourself."
Lubin stepped forward. 
"More things in heaven and earth, Horatio,"  Rowan said.
Something in Lubin's posture changed; a brief moment of tetanus, barely noticeable.  Then he relaxed.
Trigger phrase, Desjardins realised.  Some subroutine had been activated deep in Lubin's cortex.  In the space of a single breath, his agenda had changed from—
Mr. Lubin's behavior is governed by a conditioned threat-response reflex, he remembered.  He's unlikely to consider you a threat unless…
Oh Jesus.  Desjardins swallowed with a mouth gone suddenly dry. She didn't start him up just now.  She shut him down…
And he was coming for me…
"—would have only been a matter of time anyway," Rowan was saying.  "There were a couple of outbreaks down in California that didn't fit the plots.  I'm guessing you spent some time on an island off Mendocino…?"
Lubin nodded.
"We had to burn the whole thing out," the corpse went on.  "It was a shame—not many places left with real wildlife any more.  We can ill afford to lose any of them.  Still.  It's not as though you left us a choice."
"Wait a minute."  Desjardins said.  "He's infected?"  
"Of course."
"Then I should be dead," Lubin said.  "Unless I'm immune somehow…"
"You're not.  But you're resistant."
"Why?"
"Because you're not entirely human, Ken.  It gives you an edge."
"But—" Desjardins stopped.  There was no membrane isolating Patrician Rowan.  For all the available precautions, they were all breathing the same air.
"You're immune," he finished.
She inclined her head.  "Because I'm even less human than Ken."

#

Experimentally, Lubin put his hand through the face of one cube.   The soap-bubble membrane split around his flesh, snugly collared his forearm.  It iridesced conspicuously around the seal, faded when Lubin kept his hand completely immobile.  He grunted.
"The sooner we begin, the sooner we finish," Rowan said.
Lubin stepped through.  For an instant the entire face of the cube writhed with oily rainbows; then he was inside and the membrane cleared, its integrity restored.
Rowan glanced at Desjardins.  "A lot of our proteins—enzymes, particularly—don't work well in the deep sea.  I'm told the pressure squeezes them into suboptimal shapes."
Lubin's cube darkened slightly as the sterile field went on, almost as if its skin had thickened.  It hadn't, of course; the membrane was still only a molecule deep.  Its surface tension had been cranked, though.  Lubin could throw his whole considerable mass against that barrier now and it wouldn't open.  It would yield—it would stretch, and distort, and sheer momentum could drag it halfway across the room like a rubber sock with a shot-put in the toe.  But it wouldn't break, and after a few seconds it would tighten and retract back down to two dimensions.  And Lubin would still be inside.
Desjardins found that vaguely comforting.
Rowan raised her voice a fraction:  "Undress please, Ken.  Just leave your clothes on the floor.  Oh, and there's a headset hanging off the teleop.  Perhaps you could view that during the procedure."
She turned back to Desjardins.  "At any rate, we had to tweak our people before we could send them to the rift.  Retroed in some genes from deepwater fish."
"Alice said deepsea proteins were—stiff," Desjardins remembered.
"More difficult to break apart, yes.  And since the body's sulfur's locked up in the proteins, ?ehemoth has a tougher time stealing it from a rifter.  But we only backed-up the most pressure-sensitive molecules; ?ehemoth can still get at the others.  It just takes longer to compromise the cellular machinery."  
"Unless you back up everything."
"The small stuff, anyway.  Anything under fifty or sixty aminos is vulnerable.  Something about the disulphide bridges, apparently.  There's individual variation of course, vectors go anywhere from a week to a month or two without showing any symptoms, but the only way to really…" She shrugged.  "At any rate, I became half-fish."
"A mermaid."  The image was absurd.
Rowan rewarded him with a brief smile.  "You know the drill, Ken.  Face down please."
The operating board was inclined at a twenty-degree angle.  Ken Lubin, naked, face masked by the headset, braced over it as though doing push-ups and eased himself down.
The air shimmered and hummed.  Lubin went utterly limp.  And the insectile machine above him spread nightmare arms with too many joints, and descended to feed.

#

"Holy shit," Desjardins said.
Lubin had been stabbed in a dozen places.  Mercury filaments snaked into his wrists and plunged through his back.  A catheter had slid autonomously up his ass; another seemed to have kabobed his penis.  Something copper slithered into mouth and nose.  Wires crawled along his face, wormed beneath his headset.  The table itself was suddenly stippled with fine needles:  Lubin was fixed in place like an insect pushed onto the bristles of a wire brush.
"It's not as bad as it looks," Rowan remarked.  "The neuroinduction field blocks most of the pain."
"Fuck."  The second cube, empty and waiting, shone like a threat of inquisition.  "Am I—"
Rowan pursed her lips.  "I doubt that will be necessary.  Unless you've been infected, which seems unlikely."
"I've been exposed for two days, going on three."
"It's not smallpox, doctor.  Unless you exchanged body fluids with the man, or used his feces as compost, chances are you're clean.  The sweep on your apartment didn't turn up anything…although you might want to know that your cat has a tapeworm."
They swept my apartment.  Desjardins tried to summon some sense of outrage. Relief was all that answered:  I'm clean.  I'm clean… 
"You'll have to undergo the gene therapy, though," Rowan said.  "So you can stay clean.  It's quite extensive, unfortunately."
"How extensive?"
She knew exactly what he was asking.
"Too extensive to immunize nine billion human beings.  At least, not in time; the vast majority of the world's population has never even been sequenced.  And even if we could, there are still millions of other species we depend on.  We can't reverse-engineer the whole biosphere."
He'd expected it, of course.  He still felt it like a blow.
"So containment's really our only option," she said quietly.  "And as you may know, someone's trying very hard to prevent that."
"Yeah."  Desjardins looked at her.  "Why is that, exactly?"
"We want you to find out."
"Me?"
"We've got our own people on it too, of course.  We'll link you up.  But you've been exceeding our performance projections right across the board, and you were the one who made the connection after all."
"I didn't make it so much as trip over it.  I mean, you'd have to be blind not to see it, once you knew what to look for."
"Well that's the problem, isn't it?  We weren't looking.  Why would we?  Why would anyone trawl Maelstrom for the names of dead rifters?  And now it turns out that everyone knows about Lenie Clarke except us.  We've got the world's best intelligence-gathering machinery and any kid with a stolen wristwatch knows more than we do."  The corpse took a deep breath, as if adjusting some great weight on her back.  "How did that happen, do you suppose?"
"Ask the kid with the wristwatch," Desjardins said.  He jerked his head at Lubin, twitching in his bubble.  "If you've got any more like that one, you'll know everything in about two seconds."
"Everything the kid knows, maybe.  Which is next to nothing."
"You just said—"
"We almost got her, did you know that?" Rowan said.  "Just yesterday.  Once you gave us the heads-up we filtered through the chaff, and we located her in South Dakota.  We closed in and found that half the city was running interference for her.  She got away."
"You interrogated the fans, though."
"Summoned by a voice in the Maelstrom.  Someone out there rallying the troops."
"Who?  Why?"
"Nobody knew.  Apparently it just jumps into likely conversations and starts cheerleading.  We left all kinds of bait when we found that out, but so far it isn't talking to us."
"Wow," Desjardins said.
"You know what's really ironic?  We thought something like this might happen.  We took precautions against it."
"You were expecting this?"
"Not specifically, of course.  The whole rifter thing just came out of left field."  Rowan sighed, her face full of shadow.  "Still, things—go wrong.  You'd think a guy with a name like Murphy would realise that, but no.  As far as ChemCog was concerned, it was just some junk meme the gels were spreading."
"The gels are behind this?"
She shook her head.  "As I said, we took precautions.  We tracked down every tainted node, we partitioned them and replaced them, we made damn sure that there was no trace of the meme left.  Just to be absolutely sure.  But here it is, somehow.  Metastasised and mutated and born again.  And all we know is that this time, the gels aren't behind it."
"But they were before, is that what you're saying?    They—they started the ball rolling?"
"Maybe.  Once upon a time."
"Why, for God's sake?"
"Well, that's the funny thing," Rowan admitted.  "We told them to."

#

Rowan fed it all directly to his inlays.  There was too much for even an optimised 'lawbreaker to take in on the spot, but the executive summary thumbnailed it in fifteen seconds:  the growing threat, the rabid mutual distrust, the final reluctant surrender of control to an alien intelligence with its own unsuspected take on the virtues of parsimony.
"Jesus," Desjardins said.
"I know," Rowan agreed.
"And how the Christ did Lenie Clarke take control?"
"She didn't.  That's what's so crazy.  As far as we can tell, she didn't think anyone even knew about her until Yankton."
"Huh."  Desjardins pursed his lips.  "Still.  Whatever's out there, it's taking its lead from her."
"I know," she said softly.  She glanced at Lubin.  "That's where he comes in."
Lubin twitched and jerked under the ongoing assault.  His face—the part of it not covered by the headset, anyway—was expressionless. 
"What's he watching in there?" Desjardins wondered.
"Briefing stats.  For his next mission."
He watched a little longer.  "Would he have killed me?"
"I doubt it."
"Who is—"
"He's not someone you have to worry about any more."
"No."  Desjardins shook his head.  "I'm sorry, but that's not good enough.  He tracked me down across a whole continent, he broke into my home, he—"  cut Guilt Trip right out from under me but of course he wasn't going to admit that to Rowan, not now for Chrissakes— "I gather he's got some kind of kill-switch hardwired into him and he answers to you, Ms. Rowan.  Who is he?"
He could see her bristling.  For a moment he thought he'd gone too far.  No peon truly in Guilt Trip's grasp would ever mouth off to a superior that way, Rowan would know, the alarms would start sounding any second—
"Mr. Lubin has—you might call it an impulse control problem," she said.  "He enjoys certain acts that most would find unpleasant.  He never behaves—gratuitously is the word, I guess—but sometimes he tends to set up situations that provoke a particular response.  Do you see what I'm saying?"
He kills people, Desjardins thought numbly.  He sets up breaches so he'll have an excuse to kill people…
"We're helping him deal with his problem," Rowan said.  "And we've got him under control."
Desjardins bit his lip.
She shook her head, a trace of disapproval on those pale features.  "?ehemoth, Dr. Desjardins.  Lenie Clarke.  Lose sleep over those, if you must.  Believe me, Ken Lubin's part of the solution."  Her voice went up a touch:  "Aren't you, Ken?"
"I don't know her," Lubin said.  "Not well."
Desjardins glanced at Rowan, alarmed.  "He can hear us?"
She answered Lubin instead.  "You know her better than you think."
"You have—profiles," Lubin said.  His words were slurred; the induction field must be grazing his facial muscles.  "That psychologist.  Shcanlon."
"Scanlon had his own issues," Rowan said.  "You and Clarke have a lot more in common.  Similar outlooks, similar backgrounds.  If you were in her shoes—"
"I am in her shoes.  I came here…"  Lubin licked his lips.  A trickle of wetness glistened at the corner of his mouth.  
"Fair enough.  But suppose you had no information and no clearance, and no—behavioral constraints.  What would you be after?"
Lubin didn't speak.  His cowled face was an eyeless, high-contrast mask in the spots.  His skin almost glowed.
Rowan stepped forward. "Ken?"
"'s easy," he said at last.  "Revenge."
"Against who, exactly?"
"The—GA.  We did try to kill us, after all."
Rowan's contacts glowed with sudden input. "She was never seen near any GA offices." 
"She ashaulted someone in Hongcouver."  A spasm ran up the length of Lubin's body.  His head lolled.  "Looking for Yves Shcanlon."
"But Scanlon was her only lead, as far as we know.  It didn't go anywhere.  We don't think she's even been in N'AmPac for months."
"She has other grudges," Lubin said.  "Maybe she's—going home."
Rowan frowned, concentrating.  "Her parents, you mean."
"She mentioned Sault-St. Marie."
"Suppose she couldn't get to her parents?"
"Don' know."
"What would you do?"
"I'd—keep trying…"
"Suppose her parents were dead,"  Rowan suggested.
"…'f we killed them for her?"  
"No, suppose they were already—suppose they'd been dead a long time."
Clumsily, Lubin shook his head.  "The people she hates're very mush…alive..."
"Suppose, Ken."  Rowan was getting impatient.  "Theoretical scenario.  You've got a score to settle with the GA, and a score to settle with your parents, and you know you'll never get to either of them.  What do you do?"
His mouth moved.  Nothing came out.
"Ken?"
"—I redirect," he said at last.
"What do you mean?"
Lubin jerked like a blind marionette with most of its strings cut.
"The whole world fucked me over.  I—I wanna return the favor."
"Huh."  Rowan shook her head.  "She's pretty much doing that already."

#

One crucifixion was enough, as it turned out.  Achilles Desjardins was clean, if still vulnerable; the second surgery, prepped and waiting, had no interest in scouring his insides.
It only wanted to change him into a flounder.
Lubin's little chamber of horrors had backed off for the moment.  The assassin was sitting on the pallet—which had folded itself up into recliner mode—while a mechanical spider skittered across his body on legs like jointed whiskers.
In the adjacent cube, Desjardins looked down at an identical device on his own body.  He'd already been injected with a half-dozen tailored viruses, each containing the code for a different suite of ?ehemoth-proof proteins.  There'd be other injections over the next few days.  Lots of them.  The fever would start within a week; the nausea was already underway.
The spider was taking baselines:  bacteria from skin and hair, organ biopsies, gut contents. Every now and then it plunged a hair-thin proboscis into his flesh, provoking a diffuse ache from within the tissues.  Reverse-engineering was a tricky business these days.  If you weren't careful, tweaked genes could change the microflora in the gut as easily as the flesh of the host.  E. coli. could turn from commensal to cancer with the flip of a base-pair.  A few wily bacteria had even learned how to slip some of their own genes into viral carriers en route, and hence into human cells.  It made Desjardins long for those good old-fashioned germs which merely fed on antibiotics.
"You didn't tell her," Lubin said.  
Rowan had left them to their own devices.  Desjardins looked at the other man through two layers of membrane and tried to ignore the creepy tickle on his skin.  
"Tell her what?" he asked finally.
"That I took you off Guilt Trip." 
"Yeah?  What makes you so sure?"
Lubin's spider scrambled up his throat and tapped on his lower lip.  The assassin obligingly opened his mouth; the little robot scraped at the inside of his cheek with one appendage and retreated back down the torso.
"She wouldn't have left us alone otherwise," Lubin said.
"I thought you were leashed, Horatio."
He shrugged.  "One leash of many.  It doesn't matter."
"It sure the fuck does."
"Why?  Do you really think I was so out of control before?  Do you think I'd have even been able to unTrip you, if I honestly thought you'd breach?"
"Sure, if you sealed it up afterwards.  Isn't that your whole problem?  You set yourself up to kill people?"
"So I'm a monster." Lubin settled back in the chair and closed his eyes.  "What does that make you?"
"Me?"
"I saw what you were playing at when we first met."
Desjardins felt heat spilling across his face. "That's fantasy.  I'd never do that in real life.  I don't even fuck in real life."
Lubin opened one eye and assayed a trace of smile.  "Don't trust yourself?"
"I've just got too much respect for women."
"Really?  Seems a bit inconsistent with your choice of hobbies."  
"That's normal.  That's brainstem."  It had been such a relief to discover that at last, to see aggression and sex sharing the same hardwired pathways through the mammalian brain— to know his secret shame was a legacy millions of years old, ubiquitous for all the denial of civilized minds.  But Lubin…"As if you don't know.  You get your rocks off every time you kill someone."
"Ah."  Lubin's not-quite-smile didn't change.   "So I'm a monster, but you're just a prisoner of your inner drives."
"I fantasize.  You kill people.  Sorry, you seal security breaches."
"Not always,"  Lubin said.
Desjardins looked away without answering.  The spider ran down his leg.  
"Someone got away once," said a strange soft voice behind him.
He turned.  Lubin was staring into space, not moving.  Even his spider had paused, as if startled by some sudden change in its substrate.
"She got away," Lubin said again.  He almost sounded as though he were talking to himself.  "I may have even let her."
Clarke, Desjardins realized.
"She wasn't really a breach then, of course.  There was no way she'd ever make it out alive, there was no—but she did, somehow."
Lubin no longer wore the face of a passionless predator.  There was something new looking out from behind those eyes, and it seemed almost…confused…
"It's a shame," he said softly, "She really deserved a fighting chance…"
"A lot of people seem to agree with you," Desjardins said.
Lubin mm'd.
"Look.." Desjardins cleared his throat.   "I need some of those derms before you go."
"Derms."  Lubin seemed strangely distant.
"The analog.  You said a week or ten days before the Trip kicked back in, and that was three days ago—if they spot-test me in the next few days I'm screwed."
"Ah."  Lubin came back to earth.  "That's out of my hands now, I'm afraid.  Horatio and all."
"What do you mean, it's out of your hands? I just need a few derms, for Chrissake!"
Lubin's spider skittered off under the pallet, its regimen complete.  The assassin grabbed his clothes and began dressing.
"Well?" Desjardins said after a while.
Lubin pulled on his shirt and stepped out of the cube.  Its skin swirled in his wake.
"Don't worry about it," he said, and didn't look back.



     Anthopleura
MUG SHOT
Exotics Infestation:  Executive Summary (nontechnical)
DO NOT mail
DO NOT send through Haven
DO NOT copy
PURGE AFTER DECRYPT
To: 		Rowan, PC.
Priority:		Ultra (Global PanD)
EID Code:	?ehemoth
General Classification:  nanobial/decomposer
Taxonomy:	Formal binomial nomenclature awaiting declassified release to Linnean Society.  Eventual outgroup classification to be at supraDomain level.
Description:	Unique heterotrophic nanobe, 200-250nm diameter.  Opportunistic freeliver/commensal.  Genome 1.1M (pRNA template):  nonsense codons <0.7% of total.
Biogeography:  Originally native to hydrothermal deep-sea environments; 14 relict populations confirmed (Fig. 1).  Can also exist symbiotically in intracellular environments with salinity ? 30ppt and/or temperatures ranging from 4-60?C.  A secondary strain has been found with advanced adaptations for intracellular existence.
Evolution/Ecology:  ?ehemoth is the only organism known to have truly terrestrial origins, predating the Martian Panspermia event by approximately 800 million years.  The existence of a secondary strain geared especially to the eukaryotic intracellular environment is reminiscent of the PreCambrian serial endosymbiosis which gave rise to mitochondria and other modern subcellular organelles.  Free-living ?ehemoth expends significant metabolic energy maintaining homeostasis in stressful hydrothermal environments.  Intracellularly, infectious ?ehemoth produces an ATP surplus which can be utilized by the host cell.  This results in abnormal growth and giantism amongst certain deepwater fish; it confers slight increases in stamina and strength to infected humans in the short term, although these benefits are massively outweighed by disruption of short-chain sulfur-containing proteins and consequent deficiency syndromes (see below).
Notable Histological & Genetic Features:  No phospholipid membranes:  body wall consists of accreted mineralised sulphur/phosphate compounds.  Genetic template based upon Pyranosal RNA (Fig.2); also used for catalysis of metabolic reactions. Resistant to g-radiation (1 megarad not effective).  The ?ehemoth  genome contains Blachford genes analagous to the metamutators of Pseudomonas; these allow it to dynamically increase mutation rate in response to environmental change, and are probably responsible for its ability to fool steroid receptors on the host cell membrane. 
Modes of Attack: Freed from the rigors of the hydrothermal environment, free-living ?ehemoth assimilates several inorganic nutrients 26-84% more efficiently than its closest terrestrial competitors (Table 1).  This is especially problematic when dealing with sulfur.  In a free-living state, ?ehemoth is theoretically capable of bottlenecking even that extremely common element; this is the primary ecological threat.  ?ehemoth is, however, more comfortable within the bodies of homeothermic vertebrates, which provide warm, stable, and nutrient-rich environments reminiscent of the primordial soup.  ?ehemoth enters the cell via receptor-mediated endocytosis; once inside it breaks down the phagosomal membrane prior to lysis, using a 532-amino listeriolysin analog.  ?ehemoth then competes with the host cell for nutrients.  Host death can occur from any of a several dozen proximal causes including renal/hepatic failure, erythromytosis, CNS disorders, blood poisoning, and opportunistic infections. 
Vertebrate hosts serve as reservoirs which periodically reinoculate the nanobe into the external environment, increasing the chance of self-sustaining outbreaks.
Diagnostics:	Methionine labelling is effective in culture.  Free-living ?ehemoth in concentrations of greater than 1.35 billion/cc exert detectable effects on soil pH, conductivity, porphyrin counts, and chlorophylls A and B (Table 2); the extent of these effects varies with baseline conditions.  ?ehemoth can be infered in asymptomatic patients by the presence of d-Cysteine and d-cystine in the blood2 (unsuccessful attempts to cleave bound sulfur sometimes stereoisomerizes the molecule).  
Present Status:  See Figure 3.  4,800km2  sterilized at last report. 426,000km2 under immediate threat.
Ecological Trajectory:  If current trends continue, present models suggest long-term competitive exclusion of all competing life forms between 62?N and S latitude, due to monopolization and transformation of nutrient base.  Ultimate fate of polar components unknown at this time.  Sensitivity analysis generates 95% confidence limits of 50 to 94 years for EL90.
Recommendations:  Continue ongoing efforts to alter present trajectory.  Allocate Fallback Options budget as follows: 
1. Orbital:  	25%
2. Cheyenne: 	5%
3. M.A. Ridge:  	50%
4. Metamorph:	20%
ANEMONE
She'd become a scavenger in her own home.
Sou-Hon Perreault virtually lived in the office now.  Her office held everything of importance:  a window on the world.  A purpose.  A sanctuary.
She still had to eat, though, and use the toilet.  Once or twice a day she'd venture from her cave and see to life's necessities.  Most of the time she didn't have to deal with Martin; his contracts took him into the field more often than not.
But now—oh God, why now of all times?— he was in the living room when she came back.
He was digging around in the aquarium, his back turned.  She almost got past.
"The male died," he said.
"What?"
He turned to face her.  A damselfish, pale and stiff, weighted the dip net in his hand.  One milky eye stared blindly through the mesh.
"He looks like he's been dead for a while,"  Martin said.
She looked past him to the aquarium.  Brown algae filmed the glass.  Inside, the glorious anemone was shrunken and frayed; its tentacles twitched feebly in the current.
"Jesus, Marty.  You couldn't even be bothered to clean the tank?"
"I just got home.  I've been in Fairbanks for the past two weeks."
She'd forgotten.
"Sou, the prescriptions aren't working.  I really think we should consider wiring you up with a therapist."
"I'm fine," she said automatically.
"You're not fine.  I've looked into it already, we can afford it.  It'll be available around the clock, whenever you need it."
"I don't trust therapists."
"Sou, it'd be a part of you.  It already is, in a way, they just haven't—isolated it yet.  And it runs pathways right to your temporal lobe, so you can talk to it as easily as you can talk to anyone."
"You want to cut out a part of my brain."
"No, Sou, just rewire it.  Did you know the brain can support over a hundred fully sentient personalities?  It doesn't affect sensory or motor performance at all.  This would just be one, and it'd take up such a small amount of space—"
"My husband, the walking brochure."
"Sou—"
"It's multiple personality disorder, Martin.  I don't care what cute name they give it these days, and I don't care how many of our friends live happy fulfilling lives because they hear voices in their heads.  It's sick."
"Sou, please.  I love you.  I'm only trying to help."
"Then get out of my way."
She ran for shelter.

#

Sou-Hon.  Are you there?

"Yes."

Good.  Stand by.

Static.  A brief spiderweb of connections and intercepts, orange filaments proliferating across a continent.  Then no visual front and center, darkness everywhere else.

Go ahead.

"Lenie?"  Perreault said.
"So.  I wondered when they'd get around to this."
"Get around to what?"
"Hijacking my visor.  Sou-Hon, right?"
"Right."
"They got that right, at least."
Perreault took a grateful breath.  "You okay?"
"I got out.  Thanks partly to you, I guess.  That was you in the 'fly, wasn't it?  At Yankton?"
"That was me."
"Thanks."
"Don't thank me.  Thank—"
A damselfish flashed across Perreault's mind, safe in a nest of stinging tentacles. 
"…anemone," she finished softly.
Silence on the line.  Then:  "Thank an enemy.  That makes a lot of sense."
Perreault shook her head.  "Sea anemone.  It's this undersea ambush predator, it eats fish but sometimes—"
"I know what a sea anemone is, Suze.  So what?"
"Everything's been perverted, somehow.  The 'flies, the matchmakers— the whole system's done a one-eighty, it's protecting the very thing it was supposed to attack.  You see?"
"Not really.  But I was never that big on metaphors."  A soft laugh.  "I still can't get used to being a starfish."
Perreault wondered but didn't ask.
"This anemone of yours," Clarke said.  "It kicks ass.  It's powerful."
"Yes."
"So why is it so fucking stupid?"
"What do you mean?"
"It doesn't seem to have any kind of focus, you know?  I saw the threads—it described me a thousand different ways and then it just went with the one that stuck.  I don't know how many head cases it threw at me, through my watch, my visor—they even started coming at me out of vending machines, did you know that?—and it wasn't until I stopped talking to anyone else that it settled on you.  Any haploid would've known better than to audition most of those assholes, but your anemone is just—random.  Why is that?"
"I don't know."
"Didn't you ever wonder?"
She had, of course.  But somehow it hadn't seemed to matter that much.
"Maybe that's why you made the cut," Clarke said.  
"Why?"
"You're a good soldier.  You need a cause, you follow orders, you don't ask embarrassing questions."  A whisper of static.  Then:  "Why are you helping me, Sou?  You've seen the threads."
"You said the threads were bullshit,"  Perreault said.
"Most of them are.  Almost all.  But they blew up Channer.  They must have known the kind of collateral that would bring down, and they did it anyway.  They burned the Strip.  And the life down there on the rift, it was—God knows what was down there.  What I brought back."
"I thought your blood tested clean."
"Tests only see what they're looking for.  You haven't answered my question."
And still she didn't, for a very long time.
"Because they tried to hammer you down," she said at last.  "And you're still here."
"Huh." A long breath whispered through the headset.  "You ever have a dog, Sou-Hon?  As a pet?"
"No."
"You know what happens when you keep a dog locked away from every living thing, except you visit once a day and kick the shit out of him?"
Perreault laughed nervously.  "Someone actually tried that?"
"What happens is, the dog's a social animal, and it gets so lonely it actually looks forward to the shit-kicking.  It asks to be kicked.  It begs."
"What are you saying?"
"Maybe everyone's just so used to being kicked around, they'll help out anyone they think has a big enough boot."
"Or maybe," Perreault said, "we're so fucking tired of being kicked that we're finally lining up with anyone who kicks back."
"Yeah?  At any cost?"
"What do we have to lose?"
"You have no idea."
"But you did.  You must have known all along.  If the danger was really so great, why didn't you turn yourself in?  Save the world?  Save yourself?"
"The world had it coming," Clarke said softly.
"Is that what you’re doing?  Just—getting revenge on nine billion people you never even met?"
"I don't know.  Maybe before."
"Now?"
"I just—"  Clarke's voice broke.  Pain and confusion flooded through the breach. "Sou, I want to go home."
"So go," Perreault said gently.  "I'll help you."
A ragged breath, brought back under tight control:  "No."
"You could really use—"
"Look, you're not just a—a traveling companion any more.  I don't think either of us was really on the scope before Yankton, but they know about us now, and you—you really got in their way.  If they haven't tracked you down already, they're damn well working on it."
"You're forgetting about our anemone."
"No I'm not.  I just don't trust the fucking thing."
"Look—"
"Sou-Hon, thanks for everything.  I mean that.  But it's too dangerous.  Every second we talk, our trail gets brighter.  You really want to help me, then help yourself.  Don't try to talk to me again.  Go away.  Go somewhere safe."
A lump grew in her throat.  "Where?  Where's safe?"
"I don't know.  I'm sorry."
"Lenie, listen to me.  There's got to be a plan.  You've got to have faith, there's a purpose behind all of this.  Please, just—"
The crunch of plastic, ground underfoot.
"Lenie!"
Link lost flashed front and center.
She didn't know how long she sat there, in her own personal void.  Eventually, link lost went away.  Some other readout flashed off at the edge of vision, a rhythmic little scratch on her retina.  The effort it took to focus on it seemed almost superhuman. 

Goodbye

It said.  And:

Anemone.  We like that.
BEHIND THE LINES
A random trawl caught the anomaly fifteen nodes off the port bow.  A thousand other channels were abuzz with Lenie Clarke, but this one was so clean:  no packet loss, no drop-outs, none of the stutters and time-lags that always plagued civilian traffic in Maelstrom.  The line was full of groupies with online handles like Squidnapper and White-eyes, all at rapt attention while something whispered disinformation in their midst.  It called itself The General and it spoke with a thousand different voices: raw ascii. reinflated to specs set by each recipient's software.
It hung up the moment it heard Achilles Desjardins creeping in from behind.
Too fast for meat.  Almost too fast even for the hounds Desjardins set on its trail;  they circled the world in seconds, diving through gateways, tripping over wildlife, finding half-eaten carcasses where traffic registries had lived and breathed just moments before.  Here, and here, and here: nodes through which the General's words had passed.  Traffic logs mauled beyond recognition by earth-scorchers covering their tracks.  The hounds replicated a thousandfold and dove through all available ports in unison, trying reacquire the scent through brute force.
This time they succeeded.  The flag went up on Desjardins's board at t-plus-six seconds: something had been treed on a server in the Hokkaido microwave array.  It wasn't a smart gel.   There were no smart gels for at least four nodes in any direction.  But it was dark, and it was massive, and it was holding its breath so tight that nothing could get a fix on its exact address.  It was just in there, somewhere.  Under the surface.  
And when Achilles Desjardins seined the node, panicky wildlife scattering at his approach, the General was nowhere to be found.
"Shit..."  
He rubbed his eyes and broke the link.  The real world resolved around him—or at least, that part of it trapped within the walls of his cubby.
That was him, he remembered.  Trapped in there.  Undistracted by the endless frustration of hunting phantoms, it all came flooding back.
The real world had got even worse, now that Lubin had deserted him.

#

A hand on his shoulder.  He started, then sagged.
"Killjoy.  You look like shit," Jovellanos said kindly.
He looked up at her.  "Maybe Rowan's right."
"Rowan?"  She laid her hands on his shoulders and started kneading the muscles.  
"It's not the gels.  Maybe it really is some kind of—global conspiracy.  I can't find any other explanation…"
"Uh, Killjoy—in case you've forgotten, I haven't seen you in four days."  Her hair smelled like some extinct flower from Desjardins' childhood.  "I hear you've been hobnobbing with all sorts of strange people, but I'm nowhere near the loop, you know?"
He waved at the board, then realised that she wouldn't see anything there; he'd routed the display to his inlays.  "That whole movement.  Rifter chic or whatever the hell they call it, you know?  It's a propagation strategy.  That's all it is.  Isn't that wild?"
"Yeah?  What's it propagating?"
"?ehemoth," Desjardins whispered.
"No."  Her hands dropped away.  "How?"
"There's a vector out there.  A rifter.  Lenie Clarke.  It's all just smoke to keep her from getting caught."
"Why, for God's sake?  Why would anyone—"
"The gels started it.  I mean, they weren't supposed to, they were supposed to contain it, but—"
"They put the gels in charge?"
"What else could they do?"  Desjardins suppressed the urge to giggle.  "Nobody trusted anyone.  They knew there'd be sacrifices, they knew they might have to sterilise—major areas.  But when China says hey, our stats say Oregon's got to go for the greater good, do you think N'Am's gonna just roll over and take China's word on that?  They needed something that could decide, and act, and who wouldn't play favorites…"
"Fuck," Jovellanos whispered.
"They were so busy keeping an eye on each other they never stopped to think what kind of take-home rules a net might develop on its own, after spending a whole lifetime protecting small simple things from big complicated things.   And then they tell it to protect a complex of five million species against one pissant nanobe and they can't understand why it turns around and bites them in the ass."
Jovellanos said nothing.
"Anyway, it doesn't matter.  They scrubbed the gels down to the last neuron and it didn't do any good.  There's something else out there.  I've flushed the fucker four times in the past twenty-four hours and it keeps slipping through my fingers.  We could swap out every gel in Maelstrom and the replacements would be reinfected inside a week." 
"But if not the gels, then what?"
"I don't know.  For all I know it's a pharm-baby thing, some corporation's got a cure and they're spreading ?ehemoth to drive up the price.  But how they’re pulling it off—"
"Turing app, maybe?"
"Or berserkers.  I thought of that.  But those leave footprints—op signatures on the hardware, huge memory demands.  And anything that complex attracts wildlife like you wouldn't believe."
"You're not seeing any of that?"
"Lots of wildlife, maybe.  Nothing else."
"So maybe it autowipes when it sees you coming."
"Footprints'd still be in the server log."
"Not if it doctors the log before it deletes."
"Then the deletion would be on file.  I'm telling you Alice, this is something else."
"What if the wildlife's gotten brainy?" she said.
He blinked.  "What?"
"Why not?  It evolves.  Maybe it got smart."
He thought for a second; then shook his head.  "Nets are nets.  Doesn't matter if someone coded them or they just evolved; if they're smart enough to think, they're going to have a certain signature.  I'm not seeing it, and nobody else is either and I'm just…completely---wasted..."
He leaned forward, let the board take the weight of his forearms.  His head weighed a tonne.
"Come on," Jovellanos said after a moment.
"What?"
"We're going to Pickering's Pile.  I'm buying you a derm.  Or ten."
He shook his head.  "Thanks, Alice.  I can't."
"I checked the logs, Killjoy.   You haven't been out of this building for almost forty hours.  Sleep deprivation reduces IQ, did you know that?  Yours must be around room temp by now.  Take a break." 
He looked up at her.  "I can't.  If I leave—"
Don't worry about it, Lubin had said. 
"—I may not be able to come back," he finished.
She frowned.  "Why not?"
I'm unchained, he thought.  I'm free.
"Lubin—this guy did something to me, and…if the bloodhounds…"
She took his hand, firmly.  "Come."
"Alice, you don't know what—"
"Maybe I know more than you think, Killjoy.  If you don't think you're up to a blood test, well maybe that's a problem and maybe it isn't, but you're gonna have to bite the bullet eventually. Unless your planning on spending the rest of your life in this cubicle?"
"The next five days, maybe…"   He was so very tired.
"I know what I'm doing, Killjoy.  Trust me on this."
Desjardins managed a feeble laugh.  "People keep saying that." 
"Maybe.  But I mean it."  She drew him to his feet.  "Besides, I have something to tell you." 

#

He couldn't bring himself to enter the Pile, after all; too many ambient ears, and discretion prevailed even without Guilt Trip.  For that matter, even walking along the open sky made him a bit queasy.  The heavens had eyes.
They walked, letting chance choose the course.  Intermittent beds of Kudzu4 lined their path; the filamentous blades of windmills turned slowly overhead on the tops of buildings, along pedestrian concourses, anywhere that a bit of fetch could insinuate itself into the local architecture.  Alice Jovellanos took all of it in without a word:  Lubin, Rowan, Guilt Trip. Autonomy thrust upon the unwilling.
"Are you sure?"  she asked at last.  A streetlight flickered on overhead.  "Maybe he was lying.  He lied about Rowan, after all."
"Not about this, Alice.  Believe me.  He had his hand around my throat and I just sang, I told him stuff Trip would never've let out."
"That's not what I mean.  I believe you're Trip-free, for sure.  I just don't believe that Lubin had anything to do with it."
"What?"
"I think he just found out about it, after the fact," Jovellanos continued, "and he used it to his own advantage.  I don't know what was in those derms he was giving you, but I'd bet a year's worth of Mandelbrot's kibble that you could walk past those bloodhounds right now and they wouldn't even twitch."
"Yeah?  And if you were in my shoes, do you think you'd be quite so optimistic?"
"I'd guarantee it."
"Fuck, Alice, this is serious."
"I know, Killjoy.  I'm serious."
"But if Lubin didn't do it to me, then who—"
Her face was fading in the twilight, like the smile of a Cheshire cat.
"Alice?" he said.
"Hey." She shrugged. "You always knew my politics were a bit radical."

#

"Fuck, Alice."  Desjardins put his head in his hands.  "How could you?"
"It was easier than you might think.  Just build a Trip analog with an extra side-group—"
"That's not what I mean.  You know what I mean."
She stepped in front of him, blocking his way.
"Listen, Killjoy.  You've got ten times the brains of those felchers, and you let them turn you into a puppet."
"I'm not a puppet."
"Not any more, anyway."
"I never was."
"Sure you were.  Just like Lubin."
"I'm nothing like—"
"They turned you into one big reflex arc, my man.  Took all that gray matter and hammered it into pure hardwired instinct, through and through."
"Fuck you. You know that isn't true."
She put her hand on Desjardins' shoulder.  "Look, I don't blame you for being in denial about—"
He shrugged it off.  "I'm not in denial!   You think instinct and reflex can handle the decisions I have to make, every hour I'm on the job?  You think weighting a thousand variables on the fly doesn't require a certain degree of autonomy?  Jesus Christ, I—"
—I may be a slave but I'm not a robot.  He caught it at the back of his throat; no sense giving her any more ammunition than she already had.
"We gave you back your life, man,"  Jovellanos said softly.
"We?"
"There's a few of us.  We're kind of political, in a ragtag sorta way."
"Oh Christ." Desjardins shook his head.  "Did you even ask me if I wanted this?"
"You would've said no.  Guilt Trip would've made you.  That's the whole point."
"And just maybe I'd've said no anyway, did you ever stop to think of that?  I can kill a half-million people before lunchtime; you don't think it's a good idea to have safeguards in place?  Maybe you remember the buzz on absolute power?"
"Sure," Jovellanos said.  "Every time I see a Lertzman or a Rowan."
"I don't care about Lertzman or fucking Rowan!  You did this to me!"
"I did it for you, Achilles."
He glanced up, startled.  "What did you call me?"
"Achilles."
"Jesus."
"Listen, you're safe.  The hounds will find Trip in your blood like they always have.  That's the beauty of it, Spartacus doesn't touch the Trip.  It just blocks the receptors."
"Spartacus?  That's what you call it?"
Jovellanos nodded.
"What's that supposed to mean?"
"Look it up.  The point is—"
"And why now, of all times?" Desjardins threw his hands in the air.   "If you were going to do this to me you couldn't have picked a worse time if you tried."  
She shook her head.  "Killjoy, you're up at bat and the whole world's hanging in the balance.  If you ever needed a clear head, now's the time.  You can't afford to be chained to any corpse agenda.  Nobody can afford it."
He glared at her.  "You are such a fucking hypocrite, Alice.  You infected me.  You didn't ask, you didn't even tell, you just stuck me with some bug that could get me thrown out of my job, or worse—"
She raised her hands, as if to ward off his words.  "Achilles, I—"
"Yeah, yeah, you did it for me.  What an altruist.  Ramming Spartacus Brand Home-Cooked Autonomy down my throat whether I like it or not.  I'm your friend,  Alice!  Why did you do this?"
She stared at him for a moment in the fading light.
"You don't know?" she said at last, in a cold angry voice.  "The goddamned boy genius doesn't have a clue?  Why don't you do a path analysis or something to find out?"
She spun on her heel and walked away.
SPARTACUS
"Achilles, you can be such a raging idiot sometimes I just don't believe it.
"You know what I was risking, coming clean with you yesterday.  You know what I'm risking sending this to you now—it'll autowipe, but there's nothing these assholes can't scan if they feel like it.  That's part of the problem, that's why I'm taking this huge risk in the first place.
"I'm sorry I stomped off like that.  Things just weren't going like I hoped, you know?  But I do have some answers for you if you'll just hear me out, okay?  Just—hear me out.
"I heard what you said about trust and betrayal, and maybe some of it rings a bit more true than I'd like.  But don't you see there was no point in asking you beforehand?  As long as Guilt Trip was running the show, you were incapable of making your own decision.  You keep insisting that's wrong, you go on about all the life-and-death decisions you make and the thousands of variables you juggle but Achilles my dear, whoever told you that free will was just some complicated algorithm for you to follow?   
 "Look at bumblebees dancing some time.   You wouldn't believe the stuff they talk about.  Solar elevation, topographic cues, time-stamps—they write roadmaps to the best food sources, scaled to the centimeter, and they do it all with a few butt-wiggles.  Does that make them free agents?  Why do you think we call them drones?
"Look at the physics of a spiders spinning its web.  Hell, look at a dog catching a ball—that's ballistic math, my man.  The world's full of dumb animals who act as though they're juggling third-order differentials in their heads and it's all just instinct, man.  It's not freedom.  It's not even intelligence.  And you stand there and tell me you're autonomous just because you can follow a decision tree with a few dozen variables?
"I know you don't want to be corrupted.  But maybe a decent, honest human being is his own safeguard, did you ever think of that?  Maybe you don't have to let them turn you into one big conditioned reflex.  Maybe you just want them to, because then it's not really your responsibility, is it?  It's so easy to never have to make your own decisions.  Addictive, even.  Maybe you even got hooked on it, and you're going through a little bit of withdrawal now.
"I bet you don't even know what they took away, do you?  I bet you weren't even interested.  Sure, you read their cheery little leaflets about serving the greater good and you learned enough to pass the tests, but it was all just hoops you had to jump through to get into the next tax bracket, right?  Jesus, Killjoy.  I mean, don't get me wrong—you're a flaming genius with sims and nonparametric stats, but when it comes to the real world you wouldn't know a come-on if someone got down on their knees and unzipped your fly for you.  I mean, really.
"Anyhow, what they stole, we gave back.  And I'm going to tell you exactly what we did that, on the premise, you know, ignorance breeds fear and all that.
"You know about the Minsky receptors in your frontal lobes, and how all those nasty little guilt transmitters bind to them, and how you perceive that as conscience.  They made Guilt Trip by tweaking a bunch of behavior-modification genes snipped from parasites; the guiltier you feel, the more Trip gets pumped into your brain.  It binds to the transmitters, which changes their shape and basically clogs your motor pathways so you can't move.
"That's also why you're so fond of cats, by the way.  Baseline Toxoplasma turns rodents into cat-lovers as a way of jumping between hosts.  I bet a hundred Quebucks you weren't in such pathetic servitude to Mandelbrot until you got your shots, am I right?
"Anyway, Spartacus is basically a guilt analog.  It's got the same active sites, so it binds to the Trip, but the overall conformation is slightly different so it doesn't actually do anything except clog up the Minsky receptors.  Also it takes longer to break down than regular guilt, so it reaches higher concentrations in the brain.  Eventually it overwhelms the active sites through sheer numbers.
"That's the real beauty of it, Killjoy; both your natural transmitters and the Trip itself are still being produced normally, so a test that keys on either of  'em comes up clean.  Even a test looking for the complexed form will pass muster, since the baseline complex is still floating around—it just can't find any free receptor sites to latch onto.
"So you're safe.  Honestly.  The bloodhounds won't be a problem.  I wouldn't put you at risk, Achilles, believe me.  You mean too—you're too much of a friend for me to fuck around like that.
"Anyway, there you go.  I've stuck my neck out for you, and what happens now is pretty much up to you.  If you turn me in, though, know this:  you're making that decision.  However you rationalize it, you won't be able to blame some stupid longchain molecule.  It'll be you all the way, your own free will. 
"So use it, and think about all the things you've done and why, and ask yourself if you're really so morally rudderless that you couldn't have made all those tough decisions without enslaving yourself to a bunch of despots.  I think you could have, Achilles.  You never needed their ball and chain to be a decent human being.  I really believe that.  I'm gambling everything on it.
"Anyway.  You know where I am. You know what your options are.  Join me or stab me.  Your choice.
"Love, Alice."
TURSIPOPS
She'd last been confirmed at Yankton.   Sault-Ste-Marie crouched at the eastern corner of Lake Superior.  A straight line between those points cut across through Lake Michigan.
Ken Lubin knew exactly where to set up shop.
The Great Lakes weren't quite so great these days, not since the water shortages of the twenty-first century had reduced their volume by twenty-five percent.  (Lubin supposed it was a small price to pay to avoid the water wars breaking out everywhere else on the planet.)  Still.  Lenie Clarke was a rifter; the Lakes were still deep, and dark, and long.  Directly en route, too.  Any amphibian trying to elude capture would be crazy not to take a dip.
Of course, any amphibian with more than a room-temperature IQ would also know that her enemies would be waiting for her.
He stood four hundred meters above Lake Michigan's southern reaches.  An unbroken rim of industrial lakefront stretched around the horizon from Whiting to Evanston.  Barely visible between land and water:  the dark, broad bands of old mud that passed for shoreline wherever deep-water access wasn't a priority.
"Check the forecast lately?"  It was Burton, theAfrikaner whose command Lubin had temporarily usurped in the name of global salvation.  Holo light from the tabletop played along the line of his jaw. 
Lubin shook his head.  The other man glanced through the wraparound pane of the lifter's observation deck.  Darkness was advancing overhead, as though someone were unrolling a great black rug across the sky.  "Forecast's up to eight, now.  It'll hit us in under an hour.  If she can still breathe water it's gonna come in handy even on shore."
Lubin grunted and ran a magged scan along the Chicago waterfront.  Nothing of note there, of course.  Ant-like civilians scuttling along under a morbid sky.  She could be down there right now.  Any second one of those bugs could just jump off the breakwater right in front of me, and it'd all be over.  Or more likely I wouldn't even see it.  All the troops, all the botflies, all the heavy equipment could just keep circling around here until the storm hits, and she's safe and cold under a hundred and fifty meters of muddy water.
"You're sure she's going to try it," Burton said.
Lubin tapped a panel on the table; the map zoomed back in scale, played false-color storm-front imagery across its airspace.
"Even though she knows we're in her way," Burton continued.
But they weren't in her way, of course.  They were still hanging in mid-air, waiting for a fix.  There were just too many approaches, too much megapolitan jungle full of pipes and wires and RF signals where a single unique signature could stay endlessly anonymous.  There were some places one could safely exclude, of course.  Clarke would never be foolish enough to cross the mudflats—a klick wide in some places—that the lakes had abandoned when the water fell.  She'd stay in industrialized areas, indoors or under cover, her signal swamped and her passage unnoticed.  
At least they knew she was in Chicago somewhere; a patrolling botfly had picked up a characteristic rifter EMission just that morning, then lost it around a corner.  Another had picked up the scent through the front window of a Holiday Inn; cold, of course, by the time reinforcements arrived, but a playback on the lobby cameras hadn't left much doubt.  Lenie Clarke was in Chicago;  Lubin had pulled back standbys from Cleveland to Detroit, brought them all into tight focus around the sightings.
"You seem awfully certain, considering that whole mercury thing," Burton remarked.  "Have you run this past anyone upstairs?"
"I want the dolphins set down right about there,"  Lubin said, pinpointing a spot on the tabletop.  "Take care of it, will you?"
"Sure."  Burton moved back to his panel.  Lubin spared a moment to watch his back.
      Patience, Burton.  You'll get your chance soon enough.
If I fuck up…

#

If he fucked up again, actually.
He still couldn't believe it.  All those blood tests he'd ordered, all those path scans, and he'd never thought to test for heavy metals.  He'd been eating raw oceanic wildlife for weeks, and it had never even occurred to him.
Idiot, he repeated to himself for the thousandth time.
The GA's medics had caught it when they were cleansing him of ?ehemoth.  They'd assured him that he couldn't be held responsible.  That was the thing about heavy metals; they affected the brain.  The mercury itself had dulled his faculties, they said.  All things considered, he'd actually been performing better than expected.
But maybe Burton could have performed better.  Maybe Burton knew it.
Burton had never much liked him, Lubin knew.  He wasn't quite sure why.  Of course, you don't inject Rwanda11 into a man's cells without expecting some increase in the usual alpha-male head-butting responses, but dispassion was a trait even more valued than ruthlessness; both of them had been tweaked for enhanced self-control even more than for the euphemistic necessary steps.
Lubin shrugged off the challenger and concentrated on the challenge.  At least Chicago narrowed the options somewhat.  Still not enough to catch Clarke until she made her move.  The simple geometry of ?r2 saw to that:  double your search radius and effectiveness dropped by a factor of four.  The waterfront was the bottleneck; wherever Clarke was now, that was where she'd be heading.   She'd be running into opposition that increased exponentially as she approached that target, the flip side of inverse-square.  Most of his people, Lubin knew, expected to take her out before she even saw the water.
He wasn't so sure.  Clarke had none of the special skills and training that armed the least of her enemies, no botflies or talking guns, but she had something.  She was smart, and she was tough, and she did not behave like a normal human being.  Pain didn't seem to frighten her at all. 
And she hated, more purely and perfectly than anyone Lubin had ever known.
She also had half of Maelstrom backing her up.  Or had until recently, anyway.  Lubin wondered if she'd grown used to being so unaccountably lucky.  Had she started to believe her own PR, had she begun to think herself invincible?  Did she know yet, that she was back on her own?
Hopefully not.  Anything that built her confidence worked in Lubin's favor.
Burton still didn't think she'd risk running the gauntlet.  Burton wanted to descend from on high and impose martial law, shut that fucking sprawl down, right to the rivets, search room by room until the next millennium if that's what it took.  Burton had no patience and no subtlety.  No appreciation for ?r2.   You don't catch fish by chasing them around the ocean with a net; you set the net where you know the fish will come, and you wait.
Of course, Burton didn't think this particular fish would come to the net.  She wasn't an idiot.  All she had to do was hang back and wait them out.  It was a plausible enough line of reasoning, if you didn't know what Lubin knew.
If you didn't know that Lenie Clarke, quite simply, was homesick.
The lost distant abyss was an ache inside of her, and if Lake Michigan was a poor imitation of that world, at least it was an imitation of some kind.  No smokers, no crystalline hot-and-cold running seawater, no glowing monsters to light the way—but fifteen atmospheres, at least.  Darkness and cold, if you stayed near the bottom.  Sheltering murk and currents enough to convect away any telltale heatprint.  It might be enough, Lubin knew.
He knew that Lenie Clarke's desire would drive her along the straightest line she could manage.  He'd known it from the moment he'd seen the records of that anomalous little outbreak in the Cariboo woods.  A patch of alpine forest even deader than the norm.  Something that had once been a man, curled protectively around something else that had once been a little girl.  The crews hadn't checked the lake at all, they'd simply burned the area the way they'd burned all the others.   It was only when Lubin had insisted—driven by his belated review of the story so far—that they'd sent back an ROV and surveyed the bottom.  It was only then that anyone noticed the cobble and deadwood kicked into violent disarray fifty meters down, in a place where the largest inhabitants had been insects.  As if something had dropped to the bottom and found it hopelessly wanting, clawed and pounded against bedrock as though driven to tunnel to the core of the earth itself.  When Lubin had seen that telemetry, he'd known.
He'd known then, as he knew now, because he felt exactly the same way.  Lenie Clarke had been a fish out of water for too long; nothing in Burton's arsenal would scare her off.  She was coming.
And if those towering black anvils advancing from the south were anything to go on, she was bringing the wrath of God along for the ride.

#

Maybe she planned it that way, he mused.  Maybe she summoned the storm the same way she summoned the quake.
It was easy to indulge in the legend, even tempting.  But you didn't have to invoke sorcery to explain the thunderheads marching on Chicago; violent storms had been the spring norm for twenty years or more in these parts.  Just another long-term surprise hatched from that chaotic package of cause-and-effect called climate change.
It had actually proven beneficial to certain aspects of the economy.  The market for shatterproof windows had never been stronger.
If she hadn't conjured the elements, though, she'd at least been smart enough to use them.  Perhaps she'd been holding back, digging her heels in against that relentless pull of dark water, until the weather was perfectly poised to cast a wrench into the machinery.
All for the better, then.  It would give her greater confidence in her own success.
The cockpit intercom beeped in his ear:  "Front's coming in too fast, sir.  We'll have to either get above it or set down."
"How long?" Lubin asked.  There wasn't a storm in the hemisphere that could ground the lifter—barring a twister, of course—but the electrical interference would be more than enough to blind them along half the spectrum. 
"Half hour, tops."  Outside, the sky flashed stark white.  An avalanche rumbled faintly through the deck. 
"Okay." Lubin magged visual.  Three hundred meters beneath him, Lake Michigan was a heaving gray cauldron of scrap metal.  There were a dozen stealthed transports between the lifter and the lake, their Thayer nets set to obliterative countershade.  Lubin could pick them out if he tried; the chromatophores lagged a bit when mimicking fast fractals.  As far as any civilian would be able to tell, though, the lifter had local airspace all to itself.
"The dolphins are down," Burton reported from across the compartment.  "And we've got a bad storm-sewer monitor on South Aberd—"
Lubin cut him off with a wave of the hand:  a white diamond icon had just appeared on the tabletop.  A second later his comlink beeped.
"West Randolph," someone reported from the depths of Chicago.  "Just past the river.  Moving east."

#

They'd strung mist nets at strategic locations along the Chicago River, in addition to the usual anti-exotic electricals;  Clarke had already ridden a river past one dragnet, and there was a chance she'd try it again.  No such luck, though; this sighting was on the wrong side of those barricades.  A botfly had snapped an aura completely inconsistent with the outside accessories of the woman who'd worn it.  The doorway she'd entered led down into a half-empty commercial warren with a hundred access points. 
Lubin realigned his pieces on the way in.  Two of the choppers dropped to within spitting distance of the waves, each giving birth to twins; minisubs like finback calves, spacing themselves in an arc two kilometers off the waterfront.  Each sub, in turn, birthed a litter of snoops that arranged themselves into a diffuse grid from surface to substrate.  
The other choppers touched down from Meigs Field to the Grand Avenue docks, disgorged their cargo, and hunkered down against the oncoming storm.  The command lifter came in behind them, pausing fifty meters above the seawall; Lubin slid down inside an extensible tube that uncoiled from the lifter's belly like an absurd proboscis.  By the time the huge airship had wallowed away a command hut had been set up at the foot of East Monroe.
Lubin braced against the rising wind and looked over the edge of Chicago's new seawall.  The streaked gray precipice rose smoothly to the railing.  The grated mouths of storm sewers punctuated the revetment at regular intervals, drooling insignificant trickles of wastewater.  Each opening was twice as high as a man.  Lubin ballparked the scale, and nodded to himself:  the weave of the grillwork was easily tight enough to keep anyone from squeezing through.
A low-flying helicopter flitted past, spraying the water: the waves in its wake swelled and congealed into a swathe of gelatinous foam.  Lubin had ordered the shoreline gelled from Lakeshore down to Meigs; the storm would probably smash the tanglefoam to lint after a while, but if Clarke hurled herself off a bridge before that point she'd be stuck like an ant in honey.  A floating pen bobbed at the offshore edge of the gelled zone, rimmed by an inflatable boom riding the waves like a boneless serpent.  Lubin tapped a control on the side of his visor; the enclosure sprang into near focus.
There.
Just for a moment, a sleek gray back, metallic inlays glinting darkly along the leading edge of the dorsal fin.  Another.  Half a dozen there all told, although you'd never see more than one on the surface at any given time.
The wind died.
Lubin slipped off his headset and looked around with naked eyes.  It was close to noon, as dark as a solar eclipse.  Overhead the sky boiled in silent, ominous slow motion.
A distant clattering roar began cascading through the city at his back: storm shutters, slamming shut along a thousand Euclidean canyons.  It sounded as though the buildings themselves were applauding the rise of some long-awaited curtain.  A single perfect raindrop,  the size of his thumbnail, splatted on the asphalt at Lubin's feet.
He turned and entered the command hut.

#

Another hallucinogenic tabletop dominated the single-room enclosure.  Lubin studied the chessboard:  two arms of security extended out from the waterfront, diverging northwest from Grand and southwest from Eisenhower.  A funnel, to guide Lenie Clarke to a place of another's choosing.  Two-point-five klicks west of the seawall, a band of botflies and exoskels formed a north-south line and began sealing off skyways and tunnels.
Seven and a half square kilometers found itself excised from the world along these boundaries.  Surface traffic moved within and without, but not across; the rapitrans grid went utterly dark across its breadth.  The flow of information took a little longer to cut off—
—wouldn't you know it another goddamned quarantine looks like I won't be able to make our eight-thirty after all, hello?  Hello? Jesus fucking Christ…
—but eventually even electrons respected the new borders.  The target, after all, was well-known to receive assistance from such quarters.  
But it was not enough to simply cut this parallelogram out of the world.  Lenie Clarke still moved there, among several hundred thousand sheep.  Lubin let Burton off the leash for a while.
A blonde Peruvian was putting a telemetry panel through its paces in one corner of the hut.  Lubin joined her while Burton feasted on the application of naked force.  "Kinsman.  How are they doing?"
"Complaining about the noise.  And they always hate freshwater ops.  Makes them feel heavy."
Her panel was a matrix of views from cams embedded in the leading edge of each dolphin's dorsal fin.  A gray crescent marred the lower edge of each window where the animals' melons intruded on the view.  Ghostly shapes slipped past each other in the green darkness beyond.  
Endless motion.  Those monsters never even slept; one cerebral hemisphere might, or the other, but they were never both unconscious at the same time.  Tweaked from raw Tursiops stock only four generation old, fins and flippers inlaid with reinforcements that gave new meaning to the term cutting edge, echolocation skills honed so fine over sixty million years that hard tech could still barely match it.  Humanity had tried all sorts of liaisons with the Cetacea over the years.  Big dumb pilot whales, eager to please.  Orcas, too large for clandestine ops and a little too prone to psychosis in confined spaces.  Lags and Spots and all those stiff-necked open-water pansies from the tropics.  But Tursiops was the one, had always been the one.  Not just smart; mean.  
If Clarke got that far, she'd never see them coming.
"What about the noise?" Lubin asked.
"Industrial waterfronts are loud at the best of times," Kinsman told him.  "like an echo chamber, all those flat reflective surfaces.  You know how you feel when someone shines bright lights in your eyes?  Same thing."
"Are they just complaining, or will it interfere with the op?"
"Both.  It's not too bad now, but when the storm sewers start draining you're gonna have a dozen whitewater sources pounding into the lake all along this part of the seawall.  Lots of noise, bubbles, stuff kicked off the bottom.  Under ideal conditions my guys can track a ping-pong ball at a hundred meters, but the way it's going outside—I'd say ten, maybe twenty."
"Still better than anything else we could deploy under the same conditions," Lubin said.
"Oh, easily."
Lubin left Kinsman to her charges and grabbed his pack off the floor.  The storm assaulted him the moment he left the hut's soundproof interior.  The downpour drenched on contact.  The sky above was as black as the asphalt below; both flashed white whenever lightning ripped the space between.  Lubin's people stood on conspicuous duty along the seawall,  punctuating every vantage point.  The rain turned them slick and black as rifters after a dive.
Shoot to kill was a given.  It might not be enough, though.  If Clarke made it this far, there were too many places she could simply dive off an embankment.  That was okay:  in fact, Lubin rather expected it.  That was what the subs and the snoops and the dolphins were for.
Only the subs were useless close to shore, and now Kinsman was saying the dolphins might not be able to acquire a target more than a few meters away …
He set his pack down and split it open.
And if the dolphins can't catch her, what makes you think you can?
The odd thing was, he actually had an answer.

#

Burton was waiting when Lubin got back inside.  "We've rounded up a bunch of—oh, very nice.  A salute to the enemy, maybe?  In her final hour?"
Lubin assayed a slight smile, and hoped that someday soon Burton would pose a threat to security.  His eyecaps slid disconcertingly beneath lids not quite reacclimated to their presence.  "What do you have?"
"We have a bunch of people who look a lot like you do right now," Burton said.  "None of them have actually seen Clarke—in fact, none of them even knew she was in town.  Maybe the Anemone's losing its touch."
"The anemone?"
"Haven't you heard?  That's what people are calling it now."
"Why?"
"Beats me."
Lubin stepped over to the chess board; half a dozen cylindrical blue icons shone at points where civilians were being held to assist the ongoing investigation.
"Of course, we're a long way from sampling the whole population yet," Burton continued.  "And we're concentrating on the obvious groupies, the costumes.  There'll be a lot more in civvies.  Still, none of the people we've interrogated so far knows anything.  Clarke could have an army if she wanted, but as far as we can tell she hasn't even begged a sandwich.  It's completely off-the-wall."
Lubin slipped his headset back on.  "I'd say it's standing her in good stead now,"  he remarked mildly.  "She seems to have you dead-ended, anyway."
"There are other suspects,"  Burton said.  "Lots of them.  We'll turn her up."
"Good luck."  The tacticals in Lubin's visor were oddly drained of color—oh, right.  The eyecaps.  He eyed the blue cylinders glowing in the zone, tweaked his headset controls until they resaturated.  Such clean, perfect shapes, each representing a grand violation of civil rights.  He was often surprised at how little resistance civilians offered in the face of such measures.  Innocent people, detained by the hundreds without charge.  Cut off from friends and family and—at least for those who'd have been able to afford it—council.  All in a good cause, of course.  Civil rights should run a distant second to global survival in anyone's book.  The usual suspects didn't know what was at stake, though.  As far as they knew, this was just another case of officially-sanctioned thugs like Burton, throwing their weight around.
Yet only a few had resisted.   Perhaps they'd been conditioned by all the quarantines and blackouts, all the invisible boundaries MEMA erected on a moment's notice.  The rules changed from one second to the next, the rug could get pulled out just because the wind blew some exotic weed outside its acceptable home range.  You couldn't fight something like that, you couldn't fight the wind.  All you could do was adapt.  People were evolving into herd animals.
Or maybe just accepting that that's what they'd always been.
Not Lenie Clarke, though.  Somehow, she'd gone the other way.  A born victim, passive and yielding as seaweed, had suddenly grown thorns and hardened its stems to steel.  Lenie Clarke was a mutant; the same environment that turned everyone else into bobbing corks had transformed her into barbed wire.
A white diamond blossomed near Madison and La Salle.  "Got her," the comlink crackled in a voice Lubin didn't recognize.  "Probably her, anyway."
He tapped into the channel.  "Probably?"
"Securicam snapshot down in a basement mall.  No EM sensor down there, so we can't confirm.  We got a three-quarter profile for a half-second, though.  Bayesians say eighty-two percent likely."
"Can you seal off that block?"
"Not automatically.  No master kill switches or anything."
"Okay, do it manually."
"Got it."
Lubin switched channels.  "Engineering?"
"Here."  They'd set up a dedicated line to City Planning.  The people on that end were strictly need-to-know, of course; no hint of the stakes involved, no recognizable name to humanize the target.  A dangerous fugitive in the core, yours is not to question why, full stop.  Almost no chance for messy security breaches there.
"Have you got the fix on La Salle?" Lubin asked, zooming the chessboard.
"Sure do."
"What's down there?"
"These days, not much.  Originally retail, but most of the merchants moved out with the spread.  A lot of empty stalls."
"No, I mean substructures.  Crawlspaces, service tunnels, that sort of thing.  Why aren't I seeing any of that on the map?"
"Oh, shit, that stuff's ancient.  TwenCen and older.  A lot of it never even got into the database; by the time we updated our files nobody was using those areas except derelicts and wireheads, and with all the data-corruption problems we've been having—"
"You don't know?"  A soft beeping began in Lubin's head:  someone else wanting to talk.
"Someone might have scanned the old blueprints onto a crystal somewhere.  I could check."
"Do that."  Lubin switched channels.  "Lubin."
It was his point man on the seawall.  "We're losing the tanglefoam."
"Already?"  They should have had at least another hour.
"It's not just the rainfall, it's the storm sewers.  They're funneling precip from the whole city right out through the seawall.  Have you seen the volume those drains are putting out?"
"Not recently."  Things just kept getting better.
Burton, unrebukably occupied with his own duties, nonetheless seemed to have an ear cocked in Lubin's direction.  "I'll be right out," Lubin said after a moment.
"That's okay," Seawall said.  "I can just feed you a—"
Lubin killed the channel.

#

Whitewater roared from a mouth in the revetment, wide as a tanker truck.  Lubin couldn't begin to guess at the force of that discharge; it extended at least four meters from the wall before gravity could even coax it off the horizontal.  The tanglefoam had retreated on all sides; Lake Michigan heaved and thrashed in the opened space, reclaiming even more territory.
Great.
There were eleven drains just like this along the secured waterfront.  Lubin redeployed two dozen inshore personnel to the seawall.
City Planning beeped in his ear.  "…nd some…"
He cranked up the filters on his headset; the roar of the storm faded a bit. "Say again?" 
"Found something!  Two-d and low-res, but it looks like there's nothing down there but a service crawlway running above the ceiling and a sewer main under the floor."
"Can they be accessed?"  Even with the filters, Lubin could barely hear his own voice.
Engineering didn't seem to have any trouble, though.  "Not from the concourse, of course.  There's a physical plant under the next block."
"And if she got into the main?"
"She'd end up at the treatment plant on Burnham, most likely."
They had Burnham covered.  But—"What do you mean, most likely?  Where else could she end up?"   
"Sewage and storm systems spill together when things get really swamped.  Keeps the treatment facilities from flooding.  It's not as bad as it sounds, though.  By the time things get this crazy, the flow's great enough to dilute the sewage—"
"Are you saying—"  A bolt of lightning cut the sky into jagged fragments.  Lubin forced himself to wait.  The thunderclap in the ensuing darkness was deafening.  "Are you saying she could be in the storm sewers?"
"Well, theoretically, but it doesn't matter."
"Why not?"
"There'd have to be an awful lot of water going through before the systems would mix.  The moment your fugitive crossed over she'd be sucked down and drowned.  No way she could fight the current, and there wouldn't be any airspace left in the pi—"
"Everything's going through the storm system now?"
"Most of it."
"Will the grates hold?"
"I don't understand," Engineering said.
"The grates!  The grills covering the outfalls!  Are they rated to withstand this kind of flow?"
"The grates are down," Engineering said.
"What!"
"They fold down automatically when tonnes-per-sec gets too high.  Otherwise they'd impede flow and the whole system would back up."
Heavy metal strikes again.
Lubin opened an op-wide channel.  "She's not coming overland.  She's—"
Kinsman, the dolphin woman, cut in:  "Ghandi's got something.  Channel twelve."
He switched channels, found himself underwater.  Half the image was a wash of static, interference even the Bayesians couldn't clear in realtime.   The other half wasn't much better: a foamy gray wash of bubbles and turbulence.  
A split-second glimpse, off to the left:  a flicker of darker motion.  Ghandi caught it too, twisted effortlessly into the new heading.  The camera rotated smoothly around its own center of focus as the dolphin rolled over on its back. The murk darkened.
He's going deep, Lubin realized.  Coming up from underneath.  Good boy.
Now the image centered on a patch of diffuse radial brightness, fading to black on all sides:  the optics of ascent towards a brighter surface.  Suddenly the target was there, dead to rights:  silhouetted arms, a head,  flashing stage left and disappearing.
"Hit," Kinsman reported.  "She never saw it coming."
"Remember, we don't want her bleeding out there," Lubin cautioned.
"Ghandi knows the drill.  He's not using his pecs, he's just ram—"
Again:  a piecemeal human shadow, found and lost in an instant.  The image jarred slightly.
"Huh," Kinsman said.  "She saw that coming somehow.  Almost got out of the way in time."
The implants.   For an instant Lubin was back on the Juan de Fuca Ridge, comfortably suspended under three kilometers of black icewater.  Feeling Beebe's sonar tick-tick-ticking against the machinery in his chest…
"She can feel the click trains," he said.  "Tell Ghandi to lay—"
Another pass.  This time the target faced her attacker head-on, eyes bright smudges in a dark jigsaw, one arm coming up in a vain attempt to ward off two hundred kilograms of bone and muscle wait a second she's holding something she's—
The image skidded to the left.  Suddenly the water was spinning again, no smooth controlled rotation this time, just a wild slewing corkscrew, purely ballistic, slowing against ambient drag.   The darkness of deep water swelled ahead.  A different darkness spilled in from the side, a black gory cloud spreading into brief cumulus before the currents tore it apart.
"Shit," Kinsman said.  Lubin's headset amped the whisper loud enough to drown thunder.
She kept her billy.  All the way from Beebe, hitching and walking and riding across the whole damn continent.
Good for her…
The vision imploded to darkness and a final flurry of static.  Lubin was back on the waterfront, sheets of rain beating the world into a blur scarcely brighter than the one he'd just left.
"Ghandi's down,"  Kinsman reported.

#

Kinsman tag-teamed two more dolphins to the site of Ghandi's last stand;  Lubin pulled abreast on the seawall a few moments after they arrived.  Burton was waiting there with a charged squid, water cascading from his rainskin.
"Fan them out," Lubin told Kinsman over the link. "Hyperbolic focus on the carcass, offshore spread."  He grabbed his fins off the scooter and stepped to the edge of the seawall, Burton at his side.  "What about Ghandi?"
"Ghandi's sockeye,"  Kinsman said.
"No, I mean what about emotional ties?  What impact will his loss have on the efficiency of the others?"
"For Singer and Caldicott, none.  They never liked him all that much.  That's why I sent them."
"Okay.  Line up the rest on a converging perimeter, but keep them away from the outfalls."
"No problem,"  Kinsman acknowledged.  "They wouldn't be much good in there anyway, with those acoustics."
"I'm switching to vocoder in thirty seconds.  Channel five."
"Got it."
Burton watched neutrally as Lubin bent over to pull on his fins.  "Bad break!" he shouted over the storm.  "About the sewers, I mean!"
Lubin snugged his heel straps, reached out for the squid.  Burton handed it over.  Lubin sealed his face flap. The diveskin reached across his eyelids and bonded to the caps beneath, blocked nose and mouth like liquid rubber.  He stood, isolated from the downpour, calmly suffocating.
Good luck, Burton mouthed through the rain. 
Lubin hugged the squid to his chest and stepped into space.

#

Michigan closed over his head, roaring.
Fifteen meters to the north, one of Chicago's ureters spewed an endless vomit of wastewater into the lake; the whirpools and eddies from that discharge reached Lubin with scarcely-diminished strength. A fog of microscopic bubbles swirled on all sides, smeared muddy light throughout the water.  Bits of detritus looped through eccentric orbits, fading to white just past the reach of his fingers.  Water sucked and slurped on all sides.  Overhead, barely visible, the rain-pelted surface writhed like mercury under rapid-fire assault—and all around, omnipresent in the heavy surge, the deep deafening roar of waterfalls.
Lubin spun in the current, insides flooding, and reveled.
He didn't think that Lenie Clarke was headed for deep water just yet.  She might not have anticipated the minisubs lurking deep offshore; she knew about the dolphins, though, and she knew about sonar.  She knew all about the effects of turbulence on sensory systems both electronic and biological.  She'd stay close to shore, hiding in the cacophony of the outfalls.  Soon, perhaps, she'd edge north or south in furtive stages, creeping along a murky jungle of wreckage and detritus left over from three centuries of out-of-sight-out-of-mind.  Even in calm weather there'd be no shortage of hiding places.
Now, though, she was injured, probably fighting shock.  Ghandi had hit her twice before Clarke had rallied; it was amazing that she'd even stayed conscious through that pounding, let alone fought back.  For the time being Lenie Clarke was holed up somewhere, just hanging on.
Lubin glanced at the nav console on his wrist.  A tiny two-d representation of local space sparkled there—starring, as Ken Lubin, a convergence of sharp green lines at center stage.  Occasional yellow pinpoints drifted in and out of range:  Kinsman's dolphins, patrolling the perimeter.  Another pinpoint, much closer, wasn't moving at all.  Lubin aimed his squid and squeezed the throttle.
Ghandi was a mess.  Clarke's billy had discharged against the right side of his head; the front of the animal had been blown apart in an instant.  Behind the dorsal fin, the carcass was pretty much intact.  Further forward a fleshy wreckage of ribs and skull remained on the left side, that maniacal idiot dolphin grin persisting even past death.  The right side was gone entirely.
Ghandi was impaled on a sunken tangle of rebar.  The current here moved offshore; the dolphin must have met his fate closer to the seawall.  Lubin swung the squid around and started upstream.
"…eive…Lu…ical?"
The word fragments buzzed along his lower jaw, all but lost in the ambient thunder.  Lubin, struck by sudden realization, cranked up the gain on his vocoder:  "Keep this channel clear. Cl—"
His words, transmuted by the vocoder into a harsh metallic buzz, caught him offguard.  It had been months since the implants had mutilated his voice that way.  The sound almost invoked a kind of nostalgia.
"No contact," he continued.  "Clarke's got L-FAM implants.  She could be listening in."
"…ain?…"
In fact, even if Clarke was tuned to the right channel, it was doubtful that she'd make any more sense of the signal than Lubin had.   Acoustic modems had not been built with whitewater in mind.
And why would she be listening anyway?  How would she know I'm even here?
It wasn't a chance he was willing to take.  He kept as silent as his quarry, wherever she was.  The lake raged around them both.
Intuition is not clairvoyance.  It's not guesswork either.  Intuition is executive summary, that ninety percent of the higher brain that functions subconsciously—but no less rigorously—than the self-aware subroutine that thinks of itself as the person.  Lubin glided through murk so thick he could barely see the squid that drew him forward; he set the machine to heel and crawled through dead twisted warrens of wreckage and dereliction, spikes and jagged edges rampant under layers of slime that softened only their appearance.  He let the current push him offshore, then grab him and hurl him against the base of the seawall itself.  He clambered sideways like a crab on gray scoured surfaces,  pressed himself flat while the water tried to peel him off and flick him away like an old decal.  He let those intuitive subroutines guide him; weighing scenarios, sifting memories, remembering happier times when Lenie Clarke had revealed this motive, that preference.  He explored some potential refuges, ignored others, and would not have been able to say exactly why.  But all parts of Ken Lubin had been well and thoroughly trained: the brain stem and the analytical subroutines and the little homunculus that sat self-consciously behind his eyes.  Each knew what to do, and what to leave to the others.
And so it was not entirely unexpected that he should come upon Lenie Clarke, hiding in the shadow of one of Chicago's absurd waterfalls, wedged in a canyon of wreckage from the previous century.
She was in bad shape.  Her body was twisted in a way that suggested Ghandi's blows had done their job.  Her diveskin had been torn along the ribcage, either from the dolphin's attack or from the jagged geometry of the lakebed.  She favored her left arm.  But she'd chosen her refuge well; too much noise for sonar, too much metal for EM signatures, too much shit in the water for anyone without the eyes and the instincts of a rifter to ever track her down.  Burton would have passed within a meter and not picked up the scent.
Good girl, he thought.
She looked up from her hiding place, her featureless white eyes meeting his through two meters of milky chaos, and he knew instantly that she recognized him.
He had hoped, against all reason, that she wouldn't.
I'm sorry, he thought.  I really don't have any choice.
Of course she still had the billy.  Of course she kept it concealed until the last moment, then yanked it into play with desperate swiftness.  Of course she tried to use it on herself; doomed anyway, what better act of final revenge than to set ?ehemoth free in one final, suicidal catharsis?
Lubin saw all of it coming, and disarmed her with barely a thought.  But the billy, when he checked, was empty.  Ghandi had taken its final charge.  Lubin dropped it onto the muddy junkscape.
I'm sorry.  The sexual anticipation of imminent murder began stirring in him.  I liked you.  You were the only—you really deserved to win...
She stared back.  She didn't trip her vocoder.  She didn't try to speak.
Any second now Guilt Trip would kick in.  Once again, Lubin felt almost sick with gratitude:  that an engineered neurochemical could so easily shoulder all responsibility for his acts.  That he was about to kill his only friend, and remain blameless of any wrongdoing.  That—
It was impossible to close one's eyes while wearing a diveskin.  The material bonded to the eyecaps, pinned the lids back in an unblinking stare.  Lenie Clarke looked at Ken Lubin.  Ken Lubin looked away.
Guilt Trip had never taken this long before.
      It's not working.  Something's wrong.
      He waited for his gut to force him into action.  He waited for orders and absolution.  He went down into himself as deep as he dared, looking for some master to take the blame. 
No.  No.   Something's wrong.
Do I have to kill her myself?
By the time he realized he wasn't going to get an answer, it was too late.  He looked back into Lenie Clarke's final refuge, steeling himself for damnation.  
And saw that it was empty.
TERRARIUM
An icon flashed at the corner of Desjardins' board.  He ignored it.
The new feed had just gone online:  a thread of fiberop snaking in all its messy physicality under the door and down the hallway.  There hadn't been any other way;  MEMA was far too security-conscious to allow civilian nodes inside its perimeter, and the General—or Anemone, or whatever it was called today—hadn't talked to any other kind since before Yankton.  If Desjardins wanted to go into combat, he'd have to do it on enemy turf.
That meant a hardline.  Outside wireless was jammed as a matter of course; even wristwatches couldn't get online in MEMA without going through the local hub.  Desjardins had envisioned a cable running through the lobby into the street, hanging a left and tripping up pedestrians all the way to the nearest public library.  Fortunately there'd been a municipal junction box in the basement.
His board upped the lumens on the icon, a visual voice-raising:  Alice Jovellanos still wants to talk.  Please respond.
      Forget it, Alice.  Your face is the last thing I want to see right now.  You're lucky I haven't turned you in already.
If Guilt Trip had been doing his—its job, he would have turned her in.  God only knew how badly he could screw up now, thanks to that little saboteur's handiwork.   God only knew how many other 'lawbreakers she was putting at risk the same way, how many catastrophes would result from sheer glandular indecision at a critical moment.  Alice Jovellanos had potentially put millions of lives in jeopardy.
Not that that amounted to a fart in a hurricane next to what ?ehemoth was gearing up for, of course.  N'AmWire had just made it public: a big chunk of the west coast was now officially under quarantine.  Even the official death toll had left the gate at four digits.
The splice fed into a new panel that crowded him on the right.  It was stand-alone and self-contained, unconnected and unconnectable to any MEMA sockets.  Vast walled spaces waited within—spaces that could swallow the contents of a node and walls that could mimic its architecture at a moment's notice.  A habitat replicator, in effect.  A terrarium. 
The icon began beeping.  He muted it.
Take a hint, Alice.
She'd really fucked him up the ass.  The problem—and the fact that it was a problem only emphasized how thoroughly she'd messed things up—was that she obviously didn't see it that way.  She thought of herself as some sort of liberator.  She'd acted out of some kind of twisted concern for his welfare.  She'd actually put his interests above the Greater Good.
      Desjardins booted the terrarium.  Start-up diagnostics momentarily cluttered the display.  He wouldn't be using his inlays this time around; they were part of the MEMA network, after all.  It was going to be raw visual and touchpads all the way.
      The Greater Good.  Right.  
      That had always been a faceless, abstract thing to human sensibilities.  It was easier to feel for the one person you knew than for the far-off suffering millions you didn't.  When the Big One had hit the Left Coast, Desjardins had watched the threads and spun his filters and breathed a silent sigh of relief that it hadn't been him under all that rubble—but on the day that Mandelbrot died, he knew, his heart would break. 
It was that illogical fact that made Guilt Trip necessary in the first place.  It was that illogical fact that kept him from betraying Alice Jovellanos.  He sure as shit wasn't ready to sit down and have a friendly chat with her, but he couldn't bring himself to sell her out either.
Besides.  If he really had figured out this whole Anemone thing, it was Alice who'd given him the idea.
He tapped the board.  A window opened.  Maelstrom howled on the other side.
Either way, he'd know within the hour.

      #
      
      It was everywhere.
      Even where it wasn't, it was.  Where it wasn't talking, it was being talked about. Where it wasn't being talked about it was being sown, tales and myths of Lenie Clarke left inert until some unsuspecting vector opened a mailbox to hatch a whole new generation.
"She's everywhere.  That's why they can't catch her."
"You're shitting static.  How can she be everywhere?"
      "Imposters.  Clones.  Who says there's only one Lenie Clarke?"
"She can, you know, beam herself.  Quantum teleportation.  It's the blood nanos she's carrying."
"That's impossible."
"Remember the Strip?" 
"What about it?"
"Lenie started it, haploid.  She just strolled onto the beach and everyone she touched just threw off the drugs and woke up.  Just like that.  Sounds nano to me."
"That wasn't nano.  That's just, you know, that firewitch bug from NoCal, the one that makes your joints fall apart?  It got into the cyclers and fucked up some molecule in the valium.  You want to know what Lenie started, she started that fucking plague …"  
      It had gotten smarter, too.  Subtler.  Hundreds of 'lawbreakers were on the watch now, prowling civilian channels for the inexplicable clarity that had alerted Desjardins the day before.  That slip hadn't been repeated, as far as anyone could tell.  
      And when Desjardins finally did acquire a target, it wasn't baud rate or drop-out that clued him in, but content:
"I know where Lenie Clarke is," it said.  It spoke with the sexless, neutral voice of inflated ascii set to default; its handle was Tesseract.  "Les-beus are on her ass, but they've lost the trail for now."  
"How do you know?"  asked someone claiming to be Poseidon-23.  
"I'm Anemone," Tesseract said. 
"Sure. And I'm Ken Lubin."
"Then your days are numbered, litcrit-o'-mine.  Ken Lubin's been turned.  He's working for the corpses now."
A lot smarter, to have known that.  Not so smart to admit it in mixed company.  Desjardins began sketching lines on his board.  
"We need to back her up," Tesseract was saying.  "Any of you in central N'Am, say around the Great Lakes?"
No queries to the local traffic log, no surreptitious trawl for Turing apps, no trace on the channel.  No moves on anything that Tesseract might be keeping an eye on.  Achilles Desjardins had gotten smarter, too.
"Piss off, Tessie."  Some skeptic going by Hiigara.  "You expect us to sub to Lenie Clarke's personal manager just showing up to chat?"
Nothing in the local node.  Desjardins started snooping adjacent servers.
"I sense skepticism," Tesseract remarked.  "Special effects is what you want.  A demonstration."
"Yowsers," said Poseidon-23, and drowned in the roar of an ocean.
Desjardins blinked.  An instant before, there'd been six people on the channel listing.  Now there were four thousand eight hundred sixty two, all speaking at once.  No one voice was comprehensible, but even the collective blare was impossibly clear: a digital babble with no distortion, no static, no arhythmic stutter of bytes delayed or lost in transit.
Silence returned.  The channel listing imploded back down to the six it had started with. 
"There you go," said Tesseract.  
Shit, Desjardins thought.  Shaken, he studied the results on his board. It's talking to all of them.  At once.
"How'd you do that?" Hiigara asked.
"I'd rather not," Tesseract whispered.  "It attracts attention.  Are any of you in central N'Am, say around the Great Lakes?"
He muted the chatter; he didn't need it, now that he had the scent.  There seemed to be a fair bit of wildlife in a hospital server across town.  He stepped inside, looked out through its portals.
Even more wildlife over there.  Desjardins stepped sideways, and found himself in Oslo National's account records.  And even more wildlife flowing out to…
Step.
Timor.  Real heavy infestation.  Of course, those little subsidiaries were still back in the twentieth century when it came to pest control, but still...
This is it, he thought.  
Don't touch anything.  Go straight to the root.
He did.  He whispered sweet nothings to gatekeepers and system clocks, flashed his ID to ease their concerns.  A very large number of users are about to get very pissed off, he reflected.
He tapped his board.  On the other side of the world, every portal on the edge of the Timor node slammed shut. 
Inside, time stuttered.
It didn't stop completely—without some level of system iteration there'd be no way to copy what was inside.  Hopefully that wouldn't matter.  A few thousand cycles, a few tens of thousands.  Maybe enough for the enemy to lurch in stop-motion increments towards some dim awareness of what was happening, but not enough—if he was lucky—to actually do anything about it.
He ignored the traffic piling up at Timor's gates.   He ignored the plaintive queries from other nodes who wondered why their feeds had gone dark.  All he saw was the math in the bubble: architecture, operating system, software.  Files and executables and wildlife.  It was almost a kind of teleportation—each bit fixed and read and reconstructed half a world away, the original left unchanged for all the intimacy of its violation.
He had it.
The Timor node jerked back up to speed.  Sudden panic from something inside; wildlife flew like leaves in a tornado, tearing at records, bursting through doorways, disemboweling itself after the fact.  It didn't matter.  It was too late.
Desjardins smiled.  He had an Anemone in a tank.

#

In the terrarium, he could stop time completely.
It was all laid out before him, flash-frozen:  a software emulation of the node itself, copies of every register and address, every spin and every bit.  He could set it all running with a single command.
And it would fly apart in seconds.  Just like the Timorese original.
So he set up inviolable backups of the logs and registries and placed them outside, with a filtered two-way pipe to the originals.  He went through each of the portals leading out of the node—gates into oblivion now, from a bubble suspended in the void—and gave a little half-twist to each.
He regarded his handiwork.  Time stood still.  Nothing moved.  
"Moebius, come forth," he murmered.
Anemone screamed.  A thousand unregistered executables leapt forward and clawed the traffic log to shreds; a million more escaped through the portals.
Ten times as many rustled and watched:
As the mutilated logs repaired themselves with barely time to bleed, magically replenished from on high;
As the wildlife which had fled through that portal came plunging back in through this one, wheeling in confusion;
As a channel opened in the midst of the wilderness and a voice rang out from Heaven: "Hey you.  Anemone."
"We don't talk to you."  Sexless, neutral.  Default.
It was still going after the records, but it was taking a dozen tacks at once:  subtle forgery, full frontal assault, everything in between.  None of it worked, but Desjardins was impressed anyway.  Damn smart.
As smart as an orb-weaving spider, blindly obeying lifetime fitness functions.  As smart as a bird, noting wind and distance and optimizing seed load to three decimal places.
"You really should talk to me," Desjardins said mildly.  "I'm God."  He caught a piece of wildlife at random, tagged it, set it free again.
"You're shitting static.  Lenie Clarke is God."  A school of fish, a flock of wheeling birds so complex you needed matrix algebra and thinking machines to understand it all.  The ascii came from somewhere inside.
 "Clarke's not God.  She's a petri dish," Desjardins said.  "You're only interested in spreading the bugs she's carrying."
Wildlife still flew through the wraparound gateways, but less randomly; some sort of systematic exploration, evolving on the fly.  Desjardins checked on the piece he'd tagged.  It had descendents already, all carrying the Mark of Cain he'd bestowed on their ancestor.  And their descendents had had descendents.
Two hundred sixty generations in fourteen seconds.  Not bad.
Thank you, Alice.  If you hadn't ranted on about dancing bumblebees, who knows when I would've figured this out…
"Maybe you need a demonstration," said the swarm.  "Special effects is what you want, yes?"
And she'd been right.  Genes have their own intelligence.  They can wire an ant for the cultivation of underground farms, the domestication of aphid cattle...even the taking of slaves.  Genes can shape behaviors so sophisticated they verge on genius, given time.
"A demonstration," Desjardins said.  "Sure.  Hit me."
Time's the catch, of course.  Genes are slow:  a thousand generations to learn some optimal-foraging trick that a real brain could pick up in five minutes.  Which is why brains evolved in the first place, of course.  But when a hundred generations fit into the space of a yawn, maybe the genes get their edge back.  Maybe wildlife learns to talk using only the blind stupid logic of natural selection— and the poor lumbering meat-sack on the other end never suspects that he's having a chat that spans generations.
"I'm waiting," Desjardins said.
"Lenie Clarke is not a demonstration." The swarm swirled in the terrarium.  Was it Desjardins imagination, or did it seem to be—fading, somehow?
He smiled. "You're losing it, aren't you?"
"Loaves and fishes for Anemone."
"But you're not Anemone.  You're just a tiny piece of it, all alone…"
Time's not enough in and of itself, of course.  Evolution needs variance as well.  Mutation and shuffling to create new prototypes, variable environments to weed out the unfit and shape the survivors.
"Clarke, Lenie.  Water lights up all cool and radium glow…"  
Life can survive in a box, for a while at least.  But it can't evolve there.  And down in Desjardins' terrarium, the population was starting to look pretty inbred.
"Free hardcore pedosnuff," the swarm murmered. "Even to enter."
Countless individuals.  Jostling, breeding.  Stagnating.
It's all just pattern.
"Sockeye," said the wildlife, and nothing more.
Desjardins realised he'd been holding his breath.  He let it out, slowly.
"Well," he whispered.  "You're not so smart after all.
"You just act like you are…"
SOUL MATE
Someone was pounding on his door.  Someone was definitely not taking the hint.
"Killjoy!  Open up!"
Go away, Desjardins thought.  He flashed his findings to the rest of the Anemone team, a far-flung assemblage of 'lawbreakers he'd never met in the flesh and probably never would.  I nailed the sucker.  I figured it out.
"Achilles!"
Grudgingly, he leaned back and thumbed the door open without looking.  "What do you want, Alice?"
"Lertzman's dead!"
He spun in his chair.  "You're kidding."
"He was pithed."  Jovellanos' almond eyes were wide and worried.  "They found him this morning.  He was braindead, he was just lying there starving to death.  Someone stuck a needle up the base of his skull and just shredded his white matter… "
"Jesus."  Desjardins stood.  "You sure?  I mean—"
"Of course I'm sure, you think I'm making it up?  It was Lubin.  It had to be, that's how he tracked you down, that's how he—"
"Yeah, Alice, I get it."  He took a step towards her.  "Thanks for—for telling me."  He began to close the door.
She stuck her foot in the way.  "That's it?  That's all you've got to say?"
"Lubin's gone, Alice.  He's not our problem any more.  And besides"— nudging her foot out of the way with his own—"you didn't like Lertzman any more than I did."
He closed the door in her face.

#

      Lertzman's dead.
Lertzman the bureaucrat.  The cyst in the system, too dormant to contribute, too deeply embedded to excise, too ineffective to matter.  
Dead.
Why do you care?  He was an asshole.
But I knew him…
The one person you know.  The far-off millions you don't.
      Could've been me.
Nothing to do about Lertzman now.  Nothing to do about his killer, even:  Lubin was out of Desjardins' life, hot on the trail of Lenie Clarke.  If he succeeded, Ken Lubin could be the savior of the planet.  Ken-the-fucking-psychopath-Lubin, savior of billions.  It was almost funny.  Maybe, after saving the world, he'd go on a killing spree to celebrate.  Set up breach after breach, sealing each with extreme and unfettered prejudice.  Would anyone have the heart to stop him, after all the good he'd done?  The salvation of billions could buy you a whole lot of forgiveness, Desjardins supposed. 
Ken Lubin, for all his quirks, was doing something worthwhile.  He was hunting the other Lenie Clarke, the real one.  The Lenie Clarke that Achilles Desjardins had been tracking was a mirage.  There was no great conspiracy after all.  No global death cult.  Anemone was a drooling idiot.  All it knew was that tales of global apocalypse were good for breeding, and that Lenie Clarke was a free pass into Haven.   It had only connected those threads through blind dumb luck.
It was a blazing irony that the person behind the words actually lived up to the billing.
Lubin's problem.  Not his.
But that was dead wrong, and he knew it.  Lenie Clarke was everyone's problem.  A threat to the greater good if he'd even seen one.
Forget Lertzman.  Forget Alice.  Forget Rowan and Lubin and Anemone, even.  None of them would matter if it wasn't for Lenie Clarke.
Worry about Clarke.  She's the one that's going to kill us all.
She'd come onto the Oregon Strip, moved north to Hongcouver.  Inland from there; she'd got through the quarantine somehow.  Then nothing for a month or so, when she'd appeared in the midwest, heading south.  Skirting the edge of a no-go zone that stretched across three states.  Two outbreaks down at the edge of the Dust Belt.  Then Yankton:  the head of an arrow, pointing somewhere in the vicinity of the Great Lakes.
Home, Lubin had said.  Sault-St. Marie.
Desjardins tapped the board:  the main menu for the N'AmPac Grid Authority lit up his inlays.  Personnel.  Clarke, Lenie 
      Deceased.
No surprise there:  bureaucracy's usual up-to-the-minute grasp of current events.  At least the file hadn't been wiped.
He called up next-of-kin:  Clarke, Indira and Butler, Jakob.
Deceased.
Suppose she couldn't get to her parents? Rowan had wondered.  Suppose they'd been dead a long time?
And Lubin had said, The people she hates are very much alive…
He called up the public registry.  No Sault-St.-Marie listing for Indira Clarke or Jakob Butler in the past three years.  That was as far back as public records went.  The central archives went back another four; nothing there either.
Suppose they'd been dead a long time?  Sort of an odd question, now that he thought about it.  
Forget the registry, Desjardins thought.  Too easy to edit.  He tried the matchmaker instead, threw a bottle into Maelstrom and asked if anyone had seen Indira Clarke or Jakob Butler hanging out with Sault-St.-Marie.  
The hit came back from N'AmPac Directory Assistance, an enquiry over seven months old.  By rights, it should have been purged just hours after its inception.  It hadn't been.  Indira was not the only Clarke it mentioned. 
Clarke, Indira, went the transcript.  Clarke with an 'e'.
How many Indira Clarkes in Sault-Ste.-Marie?
How many in all of N'Am, professional affiliation with the Maelstrom fishery, with an only female child born February 2018, named Lenie?
That's not fucking pos—
Lenie Clarke's mother did not appear to exist anywhere in North America.  And Lenie Clarke hadn't known.
Or at least, she hadn't remembered…
And how did they choose recruits for the rifter program? Desjardins reminded himself. That's right—"preadaption to stressful environments"…
Deep in his gut, something opened one eye and began growling.
He was a special guy, these days.  He even had a direct line to Patricia Rowan.  Any time, she'd told him.  Day or night.  It was, after all, nearly the end of the world.
She picked up on the second ring.

#

"It was tough, wasn't it?" Desjardins said.
"What do you mean?"
"I bet antisocial personalities make really bad students.  I bet it was next to impossible, taking all those head cases and turning them into marine engineers.  It must have been a lot easier to do it the other way around."
Silence on the line.
"Ms. Rowan?"
She sighed.  "We weren't happy about the decision, Doctor."
"I should fucking hope not," he said.  "You took human beings and—" 
"Dr. Desjardins, this is not your concern."
"Yeah?  You’re confident making that kind of call, after the last time?"
"I'm sure I don't know what you mean."
"?ehemoth wasn't my concern either, remember?  You were so worried about some other corpse getting a leg up when it got out, but there was no way you were going to come to us, were you?  No ma'am.  You handed the reins to a head cheese."
"Dr.—"
"Why do you think MEMA even exists?  Why chain us all to Guilt Trip if you aren't going to use us anyway?"
"I'm sorry, Doctor—were you under the impression that Guilt Trip made you infallible?"  Rowan's voice was laced with frostbite.  "It does not.  It simply keeps you from being deliberately corrupt, and it does that by linking to your own gut feelings.  And believe it or not, being especially tied to one's gut is not the best qualification for long-term problem-solving."
"That's not—"
"You're like any other mammal, Doctor.  Your sense of reality is anchored in the present.  You'll naturally inflate the near term and sell the long term short, tomorrow's disaster will always feel less real than today's inconvenience.  You may be unbeatable at putting out brush fires, but I shudder to think of how you'd handle issues that extend into the next decade, let alone the next century.  Guilt Trip would herd you towards the short-term payoff every time."
Her voice gentled a bit.  "Surely, if we've learned anything from recent history, it's that sometimes the short term must be sacrificed for the long."
She waited, as if challenging him to disagree.   The silence stretched. 
"It wasn't such a radical technique, really," she said at last.  
"What wasn't?"
"They're a lot more common than you might think.  Even real memories are just—cobbled together out of bits and pieces, mostly.  After the fact.  Doesn't take much to coax the brain into cobbling those pieces together in some other way.  Power of suggestion, more than anything.  People even do it by accident."
She's defending herself,  Desjardins realised.  Patricia Rowan is actually trying to justify her actions.  To me.
"So what others did by accident, you did on purpose," he said.
"We were more sophisticated.  Drugs, hypnosis.  Some deep ganglionic tweaks to keep real memories from surfacing."
"You fucked her in the head."
"For her own good, doctor.  It kept her alive."
He didn't say anything.  He didn't have to.
But Rowan wouldn't let it go.  "Do you know what it is, to be fucked in the head?  Do you know what that colorful little phrase actually means?  It means a proliferation of certain receptor sites and stress hormones.  It means triggers set at increased firing thresholds.  It's chemistry, doctor, and when you believe you've been abused—well, belief's just another set of chemicals in the mix, isn't it?  You get a—a sort of cascade effect, your brain rewires itself, and suddenly you can survive things that would leave the rest of us pissing in our boots.   Yes, we faked Lenie Clarke's childhood.  Yes, she was never really abused—"
"By her parents," Desjardins interjected.
"—but the fact that she believes she was abused is what made her strong enough to survive the rift.  Fucking her in the head probably saved her life a dozen times over."
"And now," Desjardins pointed out, "she's heading back to a home she never had, gunning for parents who don't exist, driven by abuses that never happened.  Her whole definition of herself is a lie."
"And I thank God for that," Rowan said.
"What?"
"Have you forgotten the woman's a living brood sac for the end of the world?  At least we know where she's going.  Ken can head her off.  That—that definition of herself makes her predictable, doctor.   It means we might still be able to save the earth."

#

Random intelligence from around the world scrolled on all sides.  He didn't see it.
      Ken can head her off.
Ken Lubin was Guilt-Tripped for tight security.  Lubin kept slipping up, just so he could prove that again and again.
      Someone got away, once, he'd said.  And then:  It's a shame.  She really deserved a fighting chance…
      Lenie Clarke had had more than a fighting chance:  she had legions of followers watching her back.  But they'd never really been following her.  They'd been chasing some blue-shifted evolutionary distortion, racing past at lightspeed.  Unless Anemone knew where she was and sounded the alarm—and whatever else it was, Anemone was no clairvoyant—how would anyone even know about the lone black figure crawling past them in the night?
      Lenie Clarke was just one woman.  And Ken Lubin was hunting her down.
      There was no great need to kill her.  She could be cleansed.  She could be neutralized without being erased.  But that wouldn't matter, not to Ken Lubin.
      She's the only security breach he ever left unsealed.  That's what he said. 
Achilles Desjardins had never met Lenie Clarke.  By rights, she should be one of the far-off millions.  And yet, somehow, he knew her:  someone driven entirely by other people's motives.  Everything she did, everything she felt, was the result of surgical and biochemical lies placed within her for the service of others.
      Oh yes.  I know her all right.
Suddenly, the fact that she was also a vector for global apocalypse barely even mattered any more. Lenie Clarke had a face.  He could feel her in his gut, another human being, far more real than the distant abstraction of an eight-digit death toll.
I'm going to get to her first. 
Sure, Lubin was a trained killer; but Desjardins had his own set of enhancements.  All 'lawbreakers did.  His system was awash in chemicals that could crank his reflexes into overdrive in an instant.  And with luck—if he moved fast enough—he might just beat Lubin to the target.  He might, just barely, have half a chance.
It wasn't his job.  It wasn't the Greater Good.  
Fuck both those things.
AWOL
"There's been a breach," the corpse said.  "We were hoping you could fill in some relevant details."
Half of Alice Jovellanos' facial muscles tried to go into spasm right there.  She clamped a tight lid on their aspirations and presented what she hoped was a look of oh please God let it be innocent and concerned curiosity.
Then again, what's the point?  Whispered some smart-ass inner voice.  They must know already.  Why else would they even call you in?
She clamped down on that one too.
      They're just toying with you.  No one gets to be a corpse without developing a taste for sadism.
And that…just barely.
There were four of them, gender-balanced, ringed around the far side of the conference table up in the stratosphere of Admin-14.  Slijper was the only one Jovellanos recognized—she'd just been brought in as Lertzman's replacement.  The corpses all sat arrayed on the far side of the table, backlit by little halogen spots, their faces lost in the shadow of that glare.  Except for the eyes.  All four sets of eyes twinkled intermittently as corporate intel gusted across their contacts.
They'd be monitoring her vitals, of course.  They'd know she was stressed.  Of course, anyone would be stressed under these conditions.   Hopefully subtleties like guilt and innocence were beyond the scope of the remotes.
"You're aware of the recent attack on Don Lertzman," Slijper said.  
Jovellanos nodded.
"We think it may have been connected with a colleague of yours.  Achilles Desjardins."
Okay, just the right amount of surprise here… "Achilles?  Why?"
"We were hoping you could tell us," one of the other corpses replied.
"But I don't know any—I mean, why not ask him directly?"  They already have, you idiot.  That's what led them to you, he sold you out, after all this he sold—
"—disappeared," Slijper finished.
Jovellanos straightened in her chair.  "Excuse me?"
"I said, Dr. Desjardins seems to have gone AWOL.  When he didn't show up for his shift we were concerned that he might have run into the same complications as Don, but the evidence suggests he disappeared of his own volition."
"Evidence?"
"He wants you to feed his cat," Slijper said.
"He—what do—"
Slijper held up one hand:  "I know, and I hope you'll forgive the intrusion.  He left the message on your queue.  He said he didn't know how long he was going to be gone, but he'd be grateful if you took care of —Mandelbot, is it?— and he'd keyed the door to let you in.  At any rate"—the hand dropped back below table level—"this kind of behavior is frankly unprecedented from anyone on the Trip.  He seems to have simply abandoned his post, with no apology, no explanation, no advance warning.  It's—impulsive, to say the least."
Oh, man.  Killjoy, you were covered.  Why'd you have to blow it?
"I didn't know that was even possible," Jovellanos said.  "He had his shots years ago."
"Nonetheless, here we are."  Slijper leaned back in her chair.  "We were wondering if you had noticed anything unusual in his behavior lately.  Anything which, looking back, might have suggested—"
"No.  Nothing.  Although—" Jovellanos took a breath.  "Actually, he  has been kind of—I don't know, withdrawn lately."  Well, it's true enough, and they probably know already; it'd look suspicious if I didn't mention it…
"Any idea why?" asked another corpse.
"Not really."  She shrugged.  "I've seen it happen before—it's bound to wear on you, having to deal with high-level crises all the time.  And Tripped people can't always talk about what's on their minds, you know?  So I just let him be."
Please, please, please don't let them have high-level telemetry on me now…
"I see," Slijper said.  "Well, thank you anyway, Dr. Jovellanos."
"Is that all?"  She started to rise.
"Not quite," said one of the other corpses.  "There's one other thing. Concerning—"
—Oh please no—
"—your own involvement in all this."
Jovellanos slumped back into her chair and waited for the axe to fall.
"Doctor Desjardins' disappearance leaves—well, a vacancy we really can't afford at this time," the corpse continued.
Jovellanos looked at the backlit tribunal.  A tiny part of her dared to hope.
"You worked closely with him through a great deal of this.  We understand that your own contribution to date hasn't been  negligible—in fact, you've been working below your own potential for some time now.  And you're certainly further up the learning curve than anyone else we could bring in at this point.  On the usual scales you're overdue for a promotion.   But apparently...that is, according to Psych you have certain objections to taking Guilt Trip…"
I.  Can't.  Believe.  It.
"Now please understand, we don't hold this against you," said the corpse.  "Your issues concerning invasive technology are— very understandable, after what happened to your brother.  I can't honestly say I'd feel any differently in your shoes.  That whole nanotech thing was such a debacle…"
A sudden, familiar lump rose in Jovellanos' throat. 
"So you see, we understand your objections.  But perhaps you could understand that Guilt Trip hails from a whole different arena, there's certainly nothing dangerous—"
"I do know the difference between bio and nano," Jovellanos said mildly.
"Yes, of course…I didn't mean to—"
"It's just that, what happened to Chito—logic doesn't always enter into it when you…"
Chito.  Poor, dead, tortured Chito.  These haploids don't have the slightest clue the things I've done.  
All for you, kiddo.
"Yes.  We understand that, of course.  And even though your prejudice—again, entirely understandable—even though it's held you back professionally, you've proven to be an exceptional performer.   The question is, after all these years, will you continue to be held back?"
"Because we all think that would be a shame," Slijper said.
Jovellanos looked across the table and said nothing for a full ten seconds.
"I think….I think maybe it's time to let go," she said at last.
"So you'd be willing to get your shots and move up to senior 'lawbreaker," Slijper said.
      For you, Chito.  Onward and upward.
Alice Jovellanos nodded gravely, stoically refusing to let her facial muscles do a whole different kind of dance.  "I think I'd be up for that."
SCHEHEREZADE
Fossil water, cold and gray.
She remembered the local lore, although she was no longer certain how she'd learned it.  Less than one percent of the Lakes hailed from run-off or rainfall; she swam through the liquid remains of a glacier that had melted ten thousand years before.  It would never refill once human appetites had drained it dry.
For now, there was more than enough to cover her passage.
For days the mermaid had passed through its depths.  Visions of a past she couldn't remember rose like bubbles through the dark water and the pain in her side; she'd long since stopped trying to deny them.  At night she would rise like some oversized plankter.  She couldn't risk coming ashore but she'd stocked her pack with freeze-dried rations in Chicago; she'd float on the surface and tear into the vacuum-sealed pouches like a sea otter, resubmerging before dawn.
She thought she remembered part of a childhood, spent where the three greatest Lakes converged:  Sault-Ste.-Marie, commercial bottleneck into Lake Superior.  The city sat on its locks and dams like a troll at a bridge, extorting levies from passing tonnage.  It wasn't as populous now as it had been; four hundred kilometers from the edge of the Sovereign Quebec but still too close for some, especially in the wake of the Nunavut Lease. A giant's shadow is a cold place to live at the best of times; a giant grown invincible overnight, nursing grudges from an oppressed childhood, was a complete nonstarter.  So people had left.
Lenie Clarke thought she remembered leaving.  She'd had a whole lot of first-hand experience with shadows, and giants, and unhappy childhoods.  So she too had moved away, and kept moving until the Pacific Ocean had stood in her way and said, no further.   She'd settled in Hongcouver and lived day-to-day, year to year, until that moment when the Grid Authority had turned her into something that even the ocean couldn't stop.
Now she was back.
Past midnight.  The mermaid cut quietly through a surface squirming with reflected metropolitan light.  The walls of a distant lift-lock huddled against the western sky like a low fortress, holding back the elevated waters of Lake Superior—one relic, at least, still resisting depletion.  Clarke kept the lock to her left, swam north to the Canadian side.   Derelict wharves had been rotting there since before she'd been born.  She split her hood and filled her chest with air.  She left her fins behind.
Even with night-eyes, there was no one else to be seen.
She walked north to Queen and turned east, her feet following their own innate path beneath the dim streetlights.  No one and nothing accosted her.  Eastbourne Manor continued to rot undemolished, although someone had swept away the cardboard prefabs in the past twenty years.
At Coulson she stopped, looking north.  The house she remembered was still there, just up from the corner.  Odd how little it had changed in two decades.  Assuming, of course, that those memories hadn't been…acquired… more recently.
She still hadn't seen a single vehicle, or another human being.  Further east, though—on the far side of Riverview—there was no mistaking the line of hovering 'botflies.  She turned back the way she'd come; there too.  They'd moved in behind her without a sound.
She turned up Coulson.

#

The door recognized her after all that time.  It opened like a mouth, but the inside lights—as if knowing she'd have no need of their services—remained off.
The front hall receded in front of her, barren and unfurnished; its walls glistened strangely, as if freshly laquered.  An archway cut into the left wall:  the living room, where Indira Clarke used to sit and do nothing.  Past that, the staircase.  An empty gray throat leading up into hell.
She wouldn't be going up there just yet.  She sighed and turned the corner into the living room.
"Ken," she said.
The living room, too, was an unfurnished shell.  The windows had been blacked out, but the faint street light leaking in through the hall was more than enough for rifter vision.  Lubin stood in the middle of that stark space;  he wore dryback clothes but his eyes were capped.  Just behind him, the room's only furniture:  a chair, with a man tied into it.  He appeared to be merely unconscious. 
"You shouldn't have come," Lubin said. 
"Where else was I going to go?"
Lubin shook his head.  He seemed suddenly agitated.  "It was a stupid move.  Easy to anticipate.  You must've known that."
"Where else was there?" she said again.
"This isn't even what you think it is.  This isn't what you remember."
"I know,"  said Clarke.
Lubin looked at her, frowning.
"They fucked me over, Ken.  I know that.  I guess I knew it ever since I started having the—visions, although it took me a while to…"
"Then why did you come here?"  Ken Lubin was nowhere to be found.  This thing in his place seemed almost human.
"I must have had a real childhood somewhere," Clarke said after a moment.  "They can't have faked all of it.  This seemed like the best place to start looking."
"And you think they'll let you?  You think I can let you?"
She looked at him.  His flat, empty eyes looked back from a face in unexpected torment.
"I guess not," she sighed at last.  "But you know something, Ken?  It was almost worth it.  Just— learning this much. Knowing what they did to me…"
Behind Lubin, the man in the chair stirred briefly.
"So what happens now?"  Clarke asked.  "You kill me for playing Typhoid Mary?  They need me as a lab rat?"   
"I don't know how much that matters any more.  It's all over the place now."
"What kind of plague is this, anyway?"  With mild surprise she noted the weakness of her own curiosity.  "I mean, it's been almost a year and I'm not dead, I don't even have any symptoms…"
"Takes longer with rifters,"  Lubin said.  "And it's not even a disease, strictly speaking.  More of a soil nanobe.  Locks up sulphates or something."
"That's it?"  Clarke shook her head.  "I let all those losers fuck me and it's not even going to kill them?" 
"Sure it will," Lubin said softly.  "It'll kill most everyone.  It's just going to take a while." 
"Oh."  
She tried to summon some sort of reaction to that news, some gut-level feeling of appropriate scale.  She was still trying when Lubin said, "You gave us a good run, anyway.  No one can believe you got as far as you did."
"I had help," Clarke said.
"You heard."
"I heard a lot of things," Clarke told him.  "I don't know what to make of any of it."
"I do," said the man in the chair.

#

"I'm sorry, Lenie," the man said.  "I tried to stop him."
I don't know you.  Clarke looked back at Lubin.  "He did?"
Lubin nodded.
"But he's still alive."
"I didn't even break anything."
"Wow."  She looked back at the bound man.  "So who is he?"
"Guy called Achilles Desjardins," Lubin said.  "Lawbreaker with the Entropy Patrol.  Big fan of yours, actually."
"Yeah?  Why's he tied up like that?"
"For the greater good."
She wondered briefly whether to pursue it.  Instead she turned to Desjardins, squatted down in front of him.  "You actually tried to stop him?"
Desjardins nodded.
"For me?"
"Sort of.  Not exactly," he said.  "It's—kind of hard to explain."  He wriggled against the elastic filaments binding him to the chair; they tightened visibly in response. "Think maybe you could cut me loose?"
She glanced over her shoulder; Lubin stared back in shades of gray.  "I don't think so," she said.  "Not yet."  Probably not ever.
"Come on, you don't need his permission," Desjardins said.
"You can see?"  It should have been too dark for mortal eyes to have registered her movements.
"He's a 'lawbreaker," Lubin reminded her.
"So what?"
"Enhanced pattern-matching.  He doesn't actually see any better than your average dryback, but he's better at interpolating weak input." 
Clarke turned back to Desjardins, leaned close.  "You said you knew."
"Yeah," he said.
"Tell me," she whispered.
"Look, this is not the time.  Your friend is seriously fucked in the head, and in case you haven't figured it out yet we are both—"
"Actually," Clarke said, "I don't think Ken's himself today.  Or we'd both be dead already."
Desjardins shook his head and swallowed.
"Okay, then," Clarke said.  "Do you know the story of Scheherezade?  Do you remember why she told her stories?"
"Oh, Jesus," Desjardins said weakly.
The mermaid smiled.  "Tell us a story, Achilles…"
ADAPTIVE SHATTER
Lubin listened while Desjardins laid it out.  The 'lawbreaker had obviously been reading up since their last encounter.
"The first mutations must have been really simple," he was saying.  "The gels were trying to spread ?ehemoth, and this Lenie Clarke variable had been tagged as a carrier in some personnel file.  So any bug that even had your name in its source would've had an edge, at least to start with—the gels would think it was important information so they'd let it pass.  And even when they caught on that'd just pressure the wildlife to come up with something new, and wildlife's way faster than meat.  We're like ice ages and continental drift to them, we drive their evolution but we're slow.  They've got all the time they need to come up with countermeasures. 
"So now a bunch of them have gone symbiotic, some kind of —Lenie Clarke interdiction network.  In exchange for protection from the gels.  It's like, like being a mackeral with a bunch of sharks for bodyguards, it's a huge competitive edge.  So everyone's jumping on the bandwagon."
He looked through the darkness at Clarke.  "You really catalyzed something amazing, you know.  Group selection's rare enough, but you actually inspired a bunch of separate life-forms to form—well, a colonial superorganism, really.  Individuals acting as body parts.  Some of them don't do anything but shuttle messages around, like—living neurotransmitters, I guess.  Whole lineages evolved just to handle conversation with humans.  That's why nobody could track the fucker down—we were all looking for Turing apps and neural net code and there wasn't any.    It was all genetic.  Nobody made the connection."
He fell silent.
"No."  Clarke shook her head.  "That doesn't explain anything."  She'd grown far too still during his recitation.
"It explains everything," Desjardins said.  "It—"
"So I'm just some kind of password, is that it?"  She leaned in close.  "Just a, a key to get through those fucking head cheeses.  What about Yankton, you fucker?  What about that Apocalypse Mermaid shit, and all those people with their fake eyecaps trying to suck me dry every time I turn around?  Where'd they come from?"
"S-same thing," Desjardins stammered.  "Anemone was just spreading the meme any way it could."
"Not good enough.  Say something else."
"But I don't—"
"Say something else."
"It happens all the time, for Chrissakes!  People strap bombs onto their backs or they release sarin in the passenger lounge or they go to school one day and just start shooting and they know they're gonna die but it's worth it, you know?  As long as they get the bastards who victimised them." 
She laughed: a staccato bark, the sound of something snapping.  "That's what I am in all this?  A victim?"
Desjardins shook his head.  "They're the victims.  You're just the gun they used to fight back."
She glared down at him.  He looked back, helpless.
She hit him in the face.
Desjardins toppled backwards; the back of his head hit the floor with a crack.  He lay there, tied to the overturned chair, moaning.
She turned.  Lubin was blocking her exit.
She faced him for a few seconds, unmoving.  "If you're going to kill me," she said at last,  "just do it.  Either that or get out of my way."
He considered a moment.  He stepped aside.  Lenie Clarke brushed past him and went upstairs.

#

She really had spent her childhood here, of course.  The sets were real enough; it was only the supporting roles that had been imaginary.  Lubin knew exactly where she was going.
He found her in the undarkness of her old bedroom.  It had been stripped and sprayed, like the rest of the house.  Clarke turned at his entrance, looked around tiredly at the bare walls:  "So is it abandoned?  On the market?"
"We did this before you arrived," he said.  "Just in case.  To simplify clean-up."
"Ah.  Well, it doesn't matter.  Still seems like yesterday, in fact."  She aimed her capped eyes at one wall.  "That's where my bed was.  That was where—Dad—used to play bedtime stories for me.  Foreplay, I guess you'd call it.  And there's the air duct—"  gesturing at a grille set into the baseboard—"that connects right down to the living room.  I could hear Mom playing with her favorite shows.  I always thought those shows were really stupid, but looking back maybe she didn't like them much either.  They were just alibis."
"It didn't happen,"  Lubin reminded her.  "None of it."
"I know that, Ken.   I get the point."  She took a breath.  "And you know, right now I think I'd give anything if it had."
Lubin blinked, surprised.  "What?"
She turned to face him.  "Do you have any idea what it's like to be—to be haunted by happiness?"  She managed a bitter laugh.  "All those months I kept denying it, chalking it up to stroke and hallucination because shit, Ken, I couldn't have had a happy childhood.  My parents couldn't be anything but monsters, you see?  The monsters made me what I am.  They're the only reason I survived all the shit that came later, they're the only thing that kept me going.  I was not gonna let those stumpfucks win.  Everything that drove me, every time anyone else would've quit and I didn't, every time I beat the odds, it was a slap in their big smug all-powerful monster faces.  Everything I ever did I did against them.  Everything I am is against them.  And now you stand there and tell me the monsters never even existed…"
Her eyes were hard empty spots of rage.  She glared up at him, her shoulders shaking.  But finally she turned away, and when she spoke again her voice came out soft and broken.
"They do exist though, Ken.  Honest-to-God flesh-and-blood monsters, the old fashioned kind.  They hide from the daylight and they sneak out of the swamps at night and they go on rampages just like you'd expect.  They kill and maim anyone they can get their hands on …" A long, shuddering breath.  "And all these monsters could ever say in their own defense is it happened to them first, the world fucked them long before they started fucking it back, and if anyone out there wasn't guilty, well, they hadn't stopped all the others who were, right?   So everybody's got it coming.  But the monsters can't plead self-defense, they can't even plead righteous revenge.  Nothing happened to them."
"Something happened,"  Lubin said.  "Even if your parents didn't do it."
She didn't speak for a while.  Then:  "I wonder what he was like, really."
"From what I've heard," Lubin said,  "he was just—a typical dad."
"Do you know where he is?  Where they are?"
"They died twelve years ago.  Tularemia."
"Of course."  A soft laugh.  "I guess that was one of  my qualifications, right?  No loose ends."
He stepped around her, watched her face come into view.  
It was wet.  Lubin paused, taken aback.  He'd never known Lenie Clarke to cry before.
Her capped eyes met his; a corner of her mouth twitched in something like a rueful grin. "At least, if you were right about ?ehemoth, the real culprits are in for it along with everyone else."  She shook her head.  "It's the weirdest thing I've ever heard.  I'm some killer asteroid in the sky, and the dinosaurs are actually cheering for me."
"Just the little ones."
She looked at him.  "Ken…I think maybe I've destroyed the world."
"It wasn't you."
"Right.  Anemone.  I was just the mule for a—an Artificial Stupidity, I guess you'd call it."  She shook her head.  "If you believe that guy downstairs."
"It's an old story," Lubin told her.  "Body snatchers.  Things that get inside you and make you do things you'd never do, given the—"
He stopped.  Clarke was watching him with a strange expression.
"Like your conditioned reflex ," she said quietly.  "Your—security breaches…"
He swallowed.ar "Does it ever haunt you, Ken?  All the people you've killed?"
"There's—an antidote," he admitted.  "Sort of a chaser for Guilt Trip.  Makes things easier to live with."
"Absolution," she whispered.
"You've heard of it?"  In fact, he'd never found it necessary.
"Saw some graffiti down in the Dust Belt,"  Clarke said.  "They were trying to wash it off, but there must've been something in the ink…" 
She stepped towards the hallway.  Lubin turned to follow.  Faint machine sounds and the soft hissing of fluids drifted in from outdoors.
"What's going on out there, Ken?"
"Decontamination.  We evacuated the area before you arrived."
"Gonna fry the neighborhood?"  Another step.  Clarke was in the doorway.
"No.  We know your route. ?ehemoth hasn't had a chance to spread from there even if you left any behind."
"That's not likely, I take it."
"You're not bleeding.  You didn't piss or shit anywhere since you came ashore."
She was in the hall, at the top of the stairs.  Lubin moved to her side. 
"You're just being extra careful," Clarke said.
"That's right."
"It's kind of pointless though, isn't it?"
"What?"
She turned to face him.  "I've crossed a continent,  Ken.  I was on the Strip for weeks.  I hung out in the Belt.  I just spent a week swimming through the drinking water for half a billion people.  I bled and fucked and shat and pissed more times than you can count, in oceans and toilets and half the ditches in between.  Maybe you did too, although I'd guess they've cleaned you up since then.  So really, what's the point?"
He shrugged.  "It's all we can do.  Watch for brush fires, hope to put them out before they get too big."
"And keep me from starting new ones."
He nodded.
"You can't sterilize an ocean," she said.  "You can't sterilize a whole continent."
Maybe we can, he thought.
The sounds of decontamination were louder here, but not much.  Even the occasional voice was hushed.  Almost as if the neighborhood was still infested with innocents, as though the crews feared sleeping citizens who could wake at any moment and catch them red-handed…
"You never answered me before, Ken."  Lenie Clarke took a step down the stairs.  "About whether you were going to kill me."
She's not going to run, he told himself.  You know her.  She's already taken her best shot, she's not—
You don't have to—
"Well.  I guess we'll find out," she said.  And started calmly down the stairs.
"Lenie."
She didn't look back.  He followed her down.  Surely she didn't think she could outrun him—surely she didn't think—
"You know I can't let you leave," he said behind her.
Of course she knows.  You know what she's doing.
She was at the foot of the stairs.  The open door gaped five meters in front of her.
Something deformed suddenly in Lubin's gut.  If almost seemed like Guilt Trip, but—
She was almost to the door.  Something with halogen eyes was spraying the sidewalk beyond.
Lubin moved without thinking.  In an instant he'd blocked the doorway; in another he'd closed and locked the door itself, plunging the house into darkness even by rifter standards.
"Hey,"  Desjardins complained from the living room.
A few photons snuck around the edges of the door.  Lenie Clarke was a vague silhouette by that feeble light.  Lubin felt his fists clenching, unclenching; no matter how he tried he couldn't make them stop.
"Listen," he managed to say,  "I really don't have any choice."
"I know, Ken," she said softly.  "It's okay."
"I don't," he said again, almost whimpering.
"Sure you do," boomed a strange voice in his ear.

#

What was—
"Alice?" came Desjardins' voice from around the corner.
"You're a free agent, Kenny boy, " the voice said.  "You don't have to do anything you don't want to.  Take my word for it."
Lubin tapped the bead in his ear.  "Identify yourself." 
"Alice Jovellanos, senior 'lawbreaker, Sudbury franchise.  At your service."
"No shit," drifted from the living room.  
Lubin tapped his bead again:  "We've got a breach on communications, someone going by Alice Jovellanos—"
"They already know, big man.  They were the ones who patched me through in the first place.   I gave them the rest of the night off."  
Lenie Clarke stepped back from Lubin, turned towards the darkened living room.  "What—"
"This is a restricted channel," Lubin said.  "Get off."
"Fuck that.  I outrank you."
"I gather you haven't been on the job very long."
"Long enough.  Killjoy, is Lenie Clarke there?"
"Yeah," Desjardins said.  "Alice, what—"
"She got a watch?  I've got Lubin's channel and your inlays—boy, I can't wait until they slide a set of those into my head—but nothing on Lenie—"
"Lenie," Desjardins said.  "Hold your watch away from your body."
"Don't have one," the dark shape said.
"Too bad," Jovellanos said.  "Lubin, I wasn't kidding.  You're a free man."
"I don't believe you," Lubin said.
"Killjoy's free.  Why not you as well?"
"We never met.  No opportunity."  But he was back beneath the waves in Lake Michigan, not killing Lenie Clarke.  He was in debriefing afterwards, pretending he'd never had the chance.
"It's an infection," Jovellanos said. "Real subversive.  We made sure it was airborne, packed it inside an encephalitis jacket although you'll be relieved to know the contents aren't quite so lethal.  It's spreading through MEMA even as we speak. "
All he had to do was open the door.  Even if this Jovellanos wasn't lying about ordering the crew to stand down, they wouldn't have had time to pack up yet.  Someone could just tap an icon and Alice Jovellanos would be jammed.  Another, she'd be traced.  The situation wasn't even close to out of control.
He could afford a few moments…
"The Trip's been weakening in you ever since you shared air with Killjoy there," Jovellanos was saying.  "You're calling your own shots now, Ken.  Kind of changes things, doesn't it?"
"Alice, are you completely—" Desjardins sounded almost in tears.  "That's the only leash he ever had."
"Actually, that's not true.  Ken Lubin's one of the most moral men you could ever meet."
"For God's sake, Alice—I'm fucking tied to a chair with my face caved in—"
"Trust me.  I'm looking at his medical records right now.  No serotonin or tryptophan deprivation, no TPH polymorphisms.  He may not be a fun date, but he's no impulse-killer.  Which is not to say that you don't have a few issues, Ken.  Am I right?"
"How did you—"  but of course she'd be able to access his files, Lubin realised.  It was just that any normal 'lawbreaker wouldn't be able to justify such an intrusion to Guilt Trip, not in the course of a normal assignment.
She's not bluffing.  She actually did it somehow.  She freed me…
He felt like throwing up.
"What was it like all those years, Ken?" Jovellanos purred in his ear.  "Knowing she'd got away with it?  All those nifty childhood experiences that made you so right for the job—of course you thought about revenge.  You spent your whole life fantasising about revenge, didn't you?  Anyone would have."
What am I going to do?
"You say it's an infection," he said, trying to deflect her.
"But you never once acted on it, did you Ken?  Because you're a moral man, and you knew that would be wrong."
"How does it work?"  Don't respond.  Don't let her play you.  Keep on target.
"And when the slip-ups started, those were just—mistakes, right?  Inadvertent little breaches that had to be sealed.  You killed then, of course, but there wasn't any choice.  You always played by the rules.  And it wasn't your fault, was it?  The Trip made you do it."
"Answer me."  No, no… control.  Relax. 
 Don't let her hear it…
"Only it started happening so often, and people had to wonder if you hadn't found some way to have your cake and eat it too.  That's why they sent you there weren't any security issues or mission priorities that could set you off.  They didn't want to give you a choice, so they sent you someplace you wouldn't have an excuse."
His respiration rate was far too high.  He concentrated on bringing it down.  A few steps away, Clarke's silhouette seemed dangerously attentive.
"You're still a moral man, Ken." Jovellanos said.  "You follow the rules.  You won't kill unless you don't have a choice.  I'm telling you, you've got a choice."
"Your infection," he grated.  "What does it do?"
"Liberates slaves."
Bullshit answer.  But at least she was out of his head.
"How?" he pressed.
"Complexes Guilt Trip into an inactive form that binds to the Minksy receptors.  Doesn't affect anyone who isn't already Tripped."
"What about the side-effects?" he said.
"Side effects?"  But there was something in her voice that said she already knew.
"Baseline guilt, for example," Lubin said.
Desjardins moaned.  "Oh, shit.  Of course.  Of course."
"What's going on?"  Clarke said.  "What are you talking about?"
Lubin almost laughed aloud.  Regular, garden variety guilt.  Plain old conscience.  How would they ever get into play, now that their receptor sides had been jammed?  Jovellanos and her buddies had been so busy tweaking the synthetics that they'd forgotten about chemicals that been there for aeons.
Except they hadn't forgotten.  They'd known exactly what they were doing.  Lubin was sure of it.
All hail the Entropy Patrol.  The power to shut down cities and governments, the power to save a million people here or kill a million somewhere else, the power to keep everything going or to tear it all to shreds overnight—
He turned to Clarke.  "Your fan club's been throwing off the shackles of oppression," he said.  "They're free now.  Not slaves to Guilt Trip, not slaves to guilt.  Untouchable by conscience in any form."
He raised a hand in the darkness, a bitter toast:  "Congratulations, Dr. Jovellanos.  There's only a few thousand people with their hands on all the world's kill switches, and you've turned them all into clinical sociopaths."

#

"Believe me," Jovellanos said. "You'll hardly notice the difference."
Desjardins was noticing, though.  "Shit.  Shit.  I wouldn't even be here, I mean—I just picked up and left.  I threw everything away, didn't care about the world going to pieces, I just—for one person.  Just because I wanted to."
"We psychos are notorious for bad impulse control," Clarke said, approaching him.  "Ken, how do you spring these bindings?"
Lubin glowered at her back.  Doesn't she get it?
"Come on, Ken.  The situation's contained.  None of us is going anywhere for the time being, and any rules we were playing by before seem to have pretty much gone out the window.  Maybe we could start working together for a change."
He hesitated.  Nothing she said raised any kind of alarm in his gut.  Nothing urged him into action, no other presence tried to take control of his motor nerves.  Almost experimentally, he crossed into the living room and depolarized the tanglethreads.  They slipped to the floor like overcooked pasta. 
For good measure, he pulled a lightstick from his pocket and struck it; light flared in the gutted room.  Desjardins blinked over shrinking pupils and gingerly explored the bruise on his cheek.
"Conscience is overrated anyway," Jovellanos said all around them.
"Give it a rest, Alice," Desjardins said, rubbing his wrists.
"I'm serious.  Think about it:  not everyone even has a conscience, and the people that do are invariably exploited by the ones that don't.  Conscience is—irrational, when you get right down to it."
"You are so full of shit."
"Sociopathy doesn't make you a killer.  It just means you aren't restrained from being one if the situation calls for it.  Hey, Killjoy, you could think of it as a kind of liberation. "
The 'lawbreaker snorted.
"Come on, Kill.  I'm right, you know there's at least a chance I'm right."
"What I know is that the most I can hope for is to be out of a job right up until the world ends.  If I'm not dead ten minutes from now."
"You know," Jovellanos said, "I may even be able to do something about that."
Desjardins said nothing.
"What's that, Killjoy?  Suddenly you're not telling me to fuck off?"
"Keep talking," he said.
She did.  Lubin pulled the bead out of his ear and stood up; the lightstick threw his shadow huge and ominous across the room.  Lenie Clarke sat with her back propped against the far wall; Lubin's silhouette swallowed her whole.
I could kill her in an instant, he thought, and marveled at how absurd the thought seemed.
She looked up as he approached.  "I hate it here," she said softly.
"I know."  He leaned his back against the wall, slid down at her side.
"This isn't home," she continued.  "There's only one place that was ever home."
Three thousand meters below the surface of the Pacific.  A beautiful dark universe filled with monsters and wonders that didn't even exist any more.
"What is home, really?"
It was Desjardins that had spoken.  Lubin looked back at him.
"Alice's been doing a little snooping, down avenues a bit more—political than I ever really bothered with."  Desjardins tapped the side of his head.  "She came up with some interesting shipping news, and it raises the question:  what's home?  Where your heart is, or where your parents are?"
Lubin looked at Lenie Clarke.  She looked back.  Neither spoke.
"Ah well.  Doesn't really matter,"  Desjardins said.  "Turns out you may be able to go back either way."
A NICHE
The Mid-Atlantic Ridge was a shitty place to raise one's kids, Patricia Rowan reflected.
Not that there'd been many options, of course.  In point of fact there had been three:  build an onshore refuge and trust conventional quarantine technology;  escape into high orbit; or withdraw behind the same cold, heavy barrier that had shielded the earth for four billion years before N'AmPac had punched a hole in the global condom.
They'd done the analyses from every angle.  The off-world option was least cost-effective and most vulnerable to acts of groundside retribution:  orbital stations weren't exactly inconspicuous targets, and it was a fair bet that at least some of those left behind would be ungracious enough to lob a vindictive nuke or two up the well.  And if groundside quarantine tech had been up to the job,  they wouldn't have been in this situation in the first place; that option must have been on the table only to accommodate a bureaucratic obsession with completist detail.  Or maybe as some kind of sick joke.  
There had been a fourth option—they could have stayed behind and faced ?ehemoth with the rest of the world.  They'd undergone the necessary retrofits, after all.  Even if they'd stayed on shore there would have been none of the—disintegration—that was in store for everyone else.  Not for them the lost hair and fingernails, the oozing sores, the limbs coming apart at the joints.  No blindness, no ulcers. No short-circuit seizures as insulation frayed from nervous circuitry.  No organs reduced to mush.  None of the thousand opportunistic diseases usually listed as proximate cause-of-death.  They could have stayed, and watched it happen to everyone else, and synthesised their food from raw elements once the biosphere itself was lost.
That option hadn't received a whole lot of discussion, though.
We're not even running from ?ehemoth.  We're running from our own citizens.
All of Atlantis knew that, even if nobody talked about it.  They'd seen the mobs from their penthouses, seen civil unrest graphed against time on exponential curves.  ?ehemoth, coupled with the Clarke meme:  a big enough threat, a sufficiently compelling role-model, and revolution was suddenly a lot closer than the usual three meals away.  
We were lucky to get out in time, Rowan reflected.
But they had, and here they were—several hundred corpses, essential support personnel, families and assorted hangers-on—termites dug in three kilometers down in a jumbled cluster of titanium/fullerene spheres, safely distant from the world outside, invisible to all but those with the very best technological eyes, the very best intel.  It was an acceptable risk:  most of those people were already down here.
There was lots of headroom.  There were two gymnasiums, half a dozen greenhouses and gardens thoughtfully distributed with an eye to redundancy in the unlikely event of a local implosion.  Vats of acephalic organcloners with elongate telomeres.  Three power plants that fed from a small geothermal vent—certified ehemoth-free, of course—a nice safe twelve hundred meters on the far side of an interpositioned ridge.  And somewhere out on that basalt escarpment lay a veritable junkyard of unassembled components, fragments of libraries and playgrounds and community centers, all squirreled away against some future less constrained by the need for speedy cowardice.  In the meantime, Rowan had heard many residents of  Atlantis complain about crowding.
She felt somewhat less imposed upon than most.  She'd seen the specs on the rifter stations. 
It was after midnight.  The corridor lights were dimmed in some pale parody of a sunlit existence; most of the inhabitants, accepting the facade, had withdrawn into their apartments.  Rowan's own husband and children were asleep.  For some reason, though, she couldn't bring herself to go along with the pretence.  What was the point?  Natural sleep cycles wander all over the clock without a photoperiod to calibrate the hypothalamus.  There was no sunlight here.  They would never see sunlight again.  Let it go, let it go.  
But this is temporary, they say.  Something will beat ehemoth, or somehow we'll learn to live with it.  This deep dark pit is only a refuge, not a destiny.  We'll be back, we'll be back, we'll be back…
Sure.
Sometimes, if she tried very hard, she could almost blind herself to the strings and teetering struts that kept those hopeful dreams from collapsing.  Usually it was too much trouble, and she'd wander for hours along the empty twilit corridors in defiance of her own nostalgia.  As she wandered now.
Sometimes she passed windows, and paused.  Something else Atlantis had that the rifters hadn't:  clear parabolic blisters shaped to actually draw strength from the crushing pressure.   The view was nothing to write home about, of course.  A lozenge of gray bedrock, reflecting dim light from the viewport.  Occasional blinking stars, beacons endlessly flashing here there be power lines or construction stockpile.  Very rarely, a rattail or some other unremarkable creature.  No monsters.  Nothing remotely like the ravenous glowing predators that had once plagued the rifters at Beebe Station.  
Mostly just solid, unrelieved blackness.
Sometimes Rowan would stare into that sightless void and lose track of time.  Once or twice, she even thought she'd glimpsed something looking back.  Her imagination, perhaps.  Her own reflection, thrown back from some unexpected curve in the teardrop perspex.  
Maybe even her conscience.  She could always hope.
A nexus ahead, a dim space where several corridors converged like the arms of a starfish.  A choice to be made.  Turning left would keep her on the perimeter.  All other roads led inward—to control centers, to lounges, to hollow ganglia where people accumulated even when the lights were down.  Patricia Rowan had no wish for company.  She stepped left. 
And stopped.
An apparition stood before her in the corridor, a dark wraith with empty eyes.  Seawater trickled down its skin, left small puddled footprints on the floor behind.  The figure was female; she was as black as an ocean.
The wraith reached up and split her face open.  "Hi, mom," she said.
"Lenie Clarke."  Rowan breathed the words.
"You left the door unlocked,"  Clarke said.  "I let myself in.  Hope you don't mind."
 
#

Call for help, Rowan thought.   She didn't move.
Clarke glanced around the corridor.  "Nice place.  Very spacious."  A cold, empty look at Rowan.  "You got a great deal on this.  You should've seen the dump we were in."
Call for help, she's alone, she's—
Don't be an idiot.  She didn't get into the middle of the Atlantic Ocean by herself.
"How did you find us?" Rowan said, and was relieved to hear dispassion in her voice.
"Are you kidding?  You have any idea how many resources you people had to allocate to set this place up?  And on such a tight schedule, too.  Did you really think you'd be able to cover your tracks?" 
"Most of them," Rowan admitted.  "You'd have to be a 'lawbreaker to—"
Desjardins.  But we cancelled his access…
"Yeah, those crazy 'lawbreakers."  Clarke shook her head.  "You know, they're not quite so on-board as they used to be.  We should talk about that some time."
Rowan kept her voice level.  "What do you want?"
Clarke slapped her forehead in feigned epiphany. "Of course!  I bet you're worried about  ehemoth, aren't you?  What a waste, spending all those billions on this cozy little quarantine  and all of a sudden here's Patient Zero taking a shit on the upholstery—"
"What do you want?"
Clarke stepped forward.  Rowan didn't budge.
"I want to talk to my mother,"  the rifter said softly.
"Your mother's dead."
"Well, that depends on your definition."  Clarke steepled her fingers, considering.  "Genetically, yes.  My mother's dead.  But someone made me, I think.  Remade me.  Someone took what I had, and replaced it with something else."  Her voice hardened.  "Somebody twisted me around and built me to their own specs, and fucked up pretty much every step of the way,  and after all that's what parents do.  Isn't it?"
Yes.  Yes it is.
 "So anyway," Clarke continued, "I've been on this, well, sort of a pilgrimage I guess you'd call it.  I've been looking for some answers from the person that really abused me all those years.  I figured she'd have to be some kind of monster to do that.  Big and mean and scary.  But you're not.  You're hiding, Mom.  The world's going to hell and here you are, cringeing and cowering and pissing your pants while the rest of us try and deal with the mess you made."
"Don't you dare," Rowan snapped.  "You arrogant pipsqueak, don't you fucking dare."
Clarke looked back with the faintest trace of a smile on her lip.
"You want to know who made the mess?" Rowan asked.  "We tried to contain ehemoth.   We did everything possible, we tried to wipe it off the face of the earth before it ever got out, and who was fighting us every step of the way?   Who let it out, Clarke?  Who was spreading apocalypse every time she turned around, who was so hell-bent on her self-righteous crusade she didn't care who suffered?  I'm not the angel of death.  You are.  I tried to save the world."
"By killing me.  By killing my friends."
"Your friends?  Your friends?"  Rowan fought a giddy urge to laugh.  "You blind, stupid little bitch!  We took millions in collateral damage, do you understand?  The refugees, the firestorms—I can't begin to count the people we killed to save the world from you.  Did you even stop to think about the people who helped you?  Do you know how many innocent fools got caught up in the myth, were falling over themselves to take a bullet for the great Lenie Clarke, and you know, some of them got their wish.  And the rest—well, they're just as royally fucked by your grand crusade as anyone else."  She sucked in breath through clenched teeth.  "And you won, Clarke, are you happy?  You won.  We did everything we could do to stop you,  and somehow it still wasn't enough, and now we've got our families to think of.  We can't save the world, but at least we can save our own flesh and blood.  And if you try to stop me from even doing that, I swear I'll kill you with my bare hands."
Her eyes were stinging.  Her face was wet.  She didn't care.
The rifter watched expressionlessly for a while. "You're welcome to it," she said at last.
"Welcome—"
"To your kids.  Your life, this little hideyhole you've burrowed out for yourselves.  Keep it.  You're safe.  I'm not even a vector any more."
"What, don't you want your revenge?  Isn't that what all this is about?  Don't you want to drag us back to the surface kicking and screaming to face the music?"
Clarke actually smiled a bit at that.  "No need.  You've already got a full orchestra down here."  She shrugged.  "You know, I owe you, in a way.  If it hadn't been for you I'd be just another drone in nine billion.  Then you and your cronies came along and turned me into something that changed the world." She smiled again, a faint cold whisper of amusement.  "Proud of me?"
Rowan ignored the jibe.  "So why are you here?"
"Just a messenger," Clarke said, "telling you not to worry.  You wanna stay here, that's just fine."
"And?"
"And don't ever try to come back."
Rowan shook her head.  "Going back was never part of the plan.  You could've saved yourself the trip."
"Your plans'll change the moment the situation does," the rifter said.  "We're fighting for our lives up there, Rowan.  We'd've stood a better chance if you c&c types hadn't got in and subverted the algorithm, you may have killed us already.  But we could win.  They say Anemone's a hellaciously powerful computing system, if we could only tame it."
"Right.  Anemone."  Rowan wiped her face.  "You know, I'm still not convinced it even exists.  Sounds too much like pseudomystical wish-fulfillment to me.  Like Gaia.  Or The Force."
Clarke shrugged.  "If you say so."
She's never even heard of them, Rowan thought.  Her past is irrelevant, her future's nonexistent, her present is hell on earth.
"And how do you expect a gang of electronic wildlife to get your biosphere back?" she said. 
"Not my department."  That shrug again.  "But they say we're its—natural environment, somehow.  It depends on us for survival.  Maybe, if we can make it realize that, it'll protect us."
Only if it's smarter than we were.  Rowan managed a grim smile.  "Praise be to Anemone.  Will you be erecting shrines?"
"You'll never know,"  Clarke said.  "Because there's no room for you up there if we win."
"You won't win," Rowan said.
"Then there won't be room for us either.  Doesn't change your situation any."
Sure it does.  She knows where we are.  Others must know.  Even if she leaves us alone, how many others might want their piece of retribution?
I know I would. 
Rowan stared at the woman in front of her.  On the outside, Lenie Clarke was small.  A skinny little girl.  Nowhere near as big and mean and scary as she was inside.  
"Who are you speaking for, Ms. Clarke?  Are you just signing off on us personally, or are you presuming to speak for the whole world?" 
"I'm speaking for the union," said the mermaid. 
"The union."
"The ones watching you.  Me, and Ken, and everyone else walking around with tubes in their chests after your great experiment went south.  The union.  It's an old TwenCen word.  Thought you might recognize it."
Rowan shook her head.  Even now, I underestimate her.
"So you're just going to—stand guard out there?"
Clarke nodded.
"To make sure the old dangerous infection doesn't get out into the world again?"
A smile.  A tilt of the head, saluting the metaphor.
"How long?  Six months?  Ten years?"
"As long as it takes.  Don't worry, we can manage.  We'll do it in shifts."
"Shifts."
"You made a lot of us, Pat.  Maybe you lost count.  And we've got a pretty narrow-band skill set, there aren't a whole lot of other things for us to do anyway."
"I'm—sorry," Rowan blurted out. 
"Don't be."  Lenie Clarke turned to the viewport and leaned forward.  Her eyes shone, blank but not empty.  One hand reached up and touched the darkness.
"We were born to this place," she said.


     Epilog:  Sleeping by firelight

The soft, muffled sounds filtering from the office are not English.  They're barely even human.  Martin Perreault follows them across the threshold to whatever remains of his wife.
She hasn't allowed him in here for months.  At first she was merely impatient at his presence, accusing him of all manner of trivial distraction; later she would shout at every intrusion, push him away with hands and words and even—occasionally—thrown objects.  "Can't you see it all coming apart?" she raged then.  "Can't you see past your own lousy spectrum? Can't you see she needs help?"
Finally—after the people had arrived at the door with their glittering ConTacs and their quiet relentless words and that small, softy-humming pacification 'fly hovering at their shoulders, just in case—finally Sou Hon lost even the pretence of official sanction.  She never saw them coming; the dart was in her neck before she'd even turned in her chair.  When she woke again her office was half-gutted:  every motor nerve torn out, every voice-channel squelched at source.  Every breath of influence she'd ever had, lost.
It was like being paralyzed from the neck down, she said.  She blamed him.  He'd let them in.  He hadn't protected her.  He had collaborated.
Martin didn't argue.  It was all true.
What scared him most at that point was not the accusations and the recriminations, but the flat and affectless voice in which Sou-Hon made them.  The woman who had screamed at him had somehow been submerged; the thing that spoke in her place might have been made of liquid nitrogen.  It withdrew to what remained of its office, and it said in matter-of fact tones that it would kill Martin Perreault if he ever went in there again, and it calmly closed the door in his face.
No charges have been pressed.  The people with the glittering eyes spoke understandingly of Sou-Hon's recent trauma, of her current distraught and muddled state.  She had been used by others, they said.  Many had been.  She was as much victim as offender.  No need to punish the poor woman—better that she should get help, now that she was no longer a danger to others.
Martin Perreault doesn't know if he believes that.  Mercy is not something he's come to expect from such people.  He thinks it more likely that the rumors are true, that the resources simply don't exist to prosecute Sou-Hon and her fellow criminals.  She is legion.
Perhaps that is also why the people with the glittering eyes settled for mere paralysis; they could have blinded and deafened Martin's wife as well, but cutting those nerves would have taken fifteen minutes instead of five.  Perhaps they can't spare even that much time; perhaps there are so many subversives that the system has to run as fast as it can to keep them merely hamstrung.
Besides, Sou-Hon Perreault can no longer affect events in the real world.  What harm can she do by watching?
Now she's not even doing that.  She's curled up the floor, making soft mewing noises.  Her displaced headset lies halfway across the room.  She doesn't seem aware that she's lost it.  She doesn't seem aware of Martin's presence.
He strokes her face, murmurs her name, flinches in anticipation of violence or sudden disdain.  None comes.  She doesn't react at all.  He kneels, slips his arms beneath her legs and around her shoulders;  she barely seems to weigh anything.  She shifts in his arms as he lifts, buries her face in his chest.  Still she doesn't speak.
After he tucks her into bed he returns to her office.  Sou-Hon's discarded headset spills a diffuse tangle of shifting light across the carpet.  Sliding the hardware onto his own skull, he comes face to face with a satcam view of western N'Am.  It seems strangely opaque; the hemisphere's in darkness, none of the usual enhancements brightening the view.  City clusters sparkle up from SoCal and the Queen Charlottes like galactic cores; the Midwest is a diffuse glow of underlit clouds.  The Dust Belt intrudes from the east like a dark tumor.  All features crude and raw, a naked-eye view unbolstered by radar or infrared; not like Sou-Hon at all, to restrict her sensory window this way.   The only tactical enhancements are some sort of timer running off to one side and a bright overlay a few hundred kilometers east of the Pacific, a sparkling orange line paralleling the coast from SoCal up to BC. Even that lacks the precise delineation of most computer graphics—the line seems fuzzy, even broken in places.  Martin zooms on the view, zooms again.  Resolution and brightness increase:  the orange line swells and sparkles and writhes—
It is not an overlay.  
+56h14m23s the timer says, incrementing before his eyes.
It doesn't make any sense; how could any fire could burn so brightly, for so long?  Surely the flames have consumed everything by now,  reduced all combustibles to ash and everything else to slag.  Yet somehow it keeps going, as if in defiance of physics itself.
There:  along the eastern boundary, a patch of relative darkness where the flames seem to be burning out.  Martin watches it spread with a kind of dumb relief, until the swollen black torus of a heavy lifter passes between earth and sky.  To the satcam it looks like the shadow of mercury crossing a sunspot, but even at this range there's no mistaking the bright trail it spreads behind it.  The dying flames leap high in its wake, forcibly resurrected.
They're not letting it die, he realizes.  The fire burns on endless life-support, from Oakland to Kitimat, and Martin Perreault knows with sudden dull certainty that a course has been set for it to follow.
East.
He leaves the office for a few moments, returning with a toolbox from his hobby room.  He unlatches every access panel he can, smashes open the rest.  He calmly dismembers each and every piece of equipment remaining in the room, cutting fiberop, pouring acid into computational organics,  smashing crystals with a pneumatic hammer.  Then he pads down the hall to the bedroom.  Sou Hon is asleep at last, curled into a fetal ball. He cocoons her from behind, wrapping her flesh in his, and stares off into darkness while the real world falls asleep around him.
     
Acknowledgements

Thanks first for the forebearance:  to Mike Brander, one of the nicest guys you could hope to meet, for not sueing me after I used his name in the last book.

Thanks next for the help:  Laurie Channer, Nalo Hopkinson, Brent Hayward, and Bob Boyczuk all poked and prodded an embryonic stage of the first few chapters.  Laurie also endured my endless stream-of-consciousness rambling as I tried to fit all the pieces together; hopefully her sacrifice has spared the rest of you from a similar fate.  My agent, Don Maass, made a vital criticism of opening chapters which resulted in a whole new plot thread (and hopefully, less "straining for effect").  David Hartwell edited with his usual renowned acumen, even if he did force me to cut the exploding daddy scene.

I also got diverse technical assistance from other folks with postgraduate degrees like mine, the difference being that theirs were in subjects that actually proved to be good for something.  Prof. Denis Lynn (of the University of Guelph) provided not answers, but questions, and lines of enquiry for me to pursue.  (It's been twenty years since I took a course from the man and he's still forcing me to think for myself.)  He also donated a copy of Lodish et al.'s "Molecular Cell Biology" to the cause, a text which easily outweighs the yellow pages for the GTA.  Isaac "Buckaroo Bonzai" Szpindel—an MD,  neurologist, sf-writer, screenwriter, and (no shit) electrical engineer—helped me out with the chemistry of guilt, and suggested plausible field strengths for rifter implants.  He also kept me from slipping into steroid psychosis during a massive poison-ivy infection while I was writing this book.  Drs. Alison Sinclair and Fran Terry offered insights, suggestions, and/or overheads on matters microbial.  Colin Bamsey told me what kind of alpine trees would be likely to survive the great warming.

Given a world in which Quebec has become the predominant economic power, I figured various Quebecisms would have worked their way into casual N'Am conversation—hence all those italicised expletives that left most of you scratching your heads.  For a crash course in how to be foul-mouthed in Canada's Other Official Language, I thank Joel Champetier, Glenn Grant, Daniel Sernine, and Jean-Louis Trudel, even though they couldn't come up with an alliterative translation for "blood-spewing semen-sucking sickle-celled savior".  (They did, however, dissuade me from turning "Celine Dion" into a swear word.  Just barely.)

Once again, the music of Ian Anderson and the inestimable Jethro Tull kept me company during the many long nights it took to lay this puppy to rest. 

My thanks to all of these for their efforts and/or inspiration, and apologies for all the stuff I probably got wrong anyway.
     
Notes and References


The following references helped me beat Maelstrom into a shape that's (hopefully) more plausible than if I'd just made everything up myself.  This is in addition to the references I cited two years ago in Starfish, which I won't bother repeating here:  go buy the damn book if you’re so interested.


?ehemoth

When I started writing this book, strange claims had just started surfacing in the scientific literature:  a new kind of extremely primitive microbe freshly discovered, something inconceivably small1.  So small, in fact—less than 100 nanometers in some cases—that many argued they couldn't possibly be alive2.  Believers dubbed them nanobes.  (Formal taxonomy-- Nanobacterium sanguineum—has been suggested, but not yet formally adopted3.)

Now, a couple of years later, nanobes have been found not only in hotsprings and Triassic sandstone, but in the blood of mammals (including humans)4.  Evidently they find us comfortably reminiscent of the primordial soup in which life originally evolved some 3.5 billion years ago; they feed off the phosphorus and calcium in our blood.

?ehemoth is not N. sanguineum, of course.  It's more sophisticated in some ways, more primitive in others.  Its genome is encoded in p-RNA, not DNA; it snarfs sulfur, not phosphorus and calcium; it can't survive in cold saline environments (real nanobes probably can't metabolise under such conditions either, but they can withstand them in a dormant state); it has advanced adaptations for cell penetration that are way out of Nanobacterium's league.  It's larger, as large as conventional mycoplasmas and marine bacterioplankton.  It is also much nastier, and—last but not least— it doesn't actually exist.

I have, however, tried to make this bug reasonably plausible, given the dramatic constraint of a global apocalypse in a crunchy coating.  As a result, ?ehemoth is like one of those "composite serial killers" you read about in True-Crime books—bits and pieces of various real-world bugs, thrown together with lots of dramatic license.  "A-51" really exists, both in deep lake sediments and the human mouth5.  Pseudomonas aeruginosa is another bacterium that lives quite happily in soil, water, worms, and people6; like ?ehemoth, it has genes which allow it to speed up and slow down its own rate of mutation so it can quick-adapt to novel environments.  (I've called them "Blachford genes" here, in the hopes that one Alistair Blachford will get off his ass and publish his thesis on genetic metavariation as an evolutionary strategy7.)  March and McMahon's 1999 review of receptor-mediated endocytosis8 told me how ?ehemoth would be most likely to get inside a host cell, and Decatur and Portnoy9  told me how it could avoid getting digested afterwards.  And once again, a nod to Denis Lynn of the University of Guelph for forcing me to worry about such things in the first place.

?ehemoth's genetics are cadged from a variety of sources, many of which I quoted without really understanding.  The stuff on mitochondria and pyranosal RNA come from Eschenmoser10, Gesteland et al.11, Gray et al.12, and Orgel13,14.  ?ehemoth's size and genome are consistent with theoretical size-limits for micro-organisms15, and big enough to sustain a normal microbial metabolic rate. (Real nanobes are too small to contain many enzymes, which means that many of their metabolic pathways crawl along at uncatalyzed speeds.  They therefore metabolize about ten thousand times slower than bacteria such as E. coli4, which makes them pretty poor candidates for outcompeting a whole biosphere.)  And of course, it's looking more and more likely that life itself began as a sulphur-dependent phenomenon in a hydrothermal rift vent16.  I cobbled other bits and pieces from Lodesh et al.'s "Molecular Cell Biology"17.

Why did I choose something as mind-bogglingly common as sulfur for a bottleneck element?  I was trying to make a point about carrying capacity in ecological systems:  life is greedy, and if you give it long enough, anything can become limiting.  Besides, any primitive microbe from a hydrothermal environment is likely to have a serious sulphur-dependency problem. (The specialists in the audience will notice that I carefully avoided making ?ehemoth an obligate sulphur-reducer; I actually envision the little mother's metabolism as being more akin to that of the giant sulfide-consuming microbes reported by Schulz et al.18.)

Bottom line, each of ?ehemoth's traits has a real-world precedent.  Whether evolution could actually pack all those attributes into a package 250 nanometers across is a whole different issue, of course.  Still.  Look at all the stuff that fits into Batman's utility belt.


Guilt Trip:

The idea of behavior-modification technology is old stuff in fiction;  Burgess' A Clockwork Orange is an obvious example.  In Maelstrom I've taken a stab at rediscovering that wheel by explicitly tweaking genes and neurochemistry. 

As far as I know, the existence of the "Minsky Nodes" that Alice Jovellanos mentions has yet to be confirmed.  Something like them, however, must be seated in the frontal cortex where human conscience and morality (such as they are) reside19,20.  At the very least, certain types of frontal-lobe damage have a tendency to turn good God-fearing folk into sociopaths. 

I imagine that Ken Lubin's murder reflex is wired into the neural circuitry described by R Davidson et al.21  The conceit of using tweaked parasite genes to program such behaviour came to me when I was teaching an undergraduate course in animal ecology.  The parasites mentioned in Maelstrom are real, and have a lot of company22, 23.  One fly-eating fungus hijacks its victim's nervous system just before killing it, forcing it to fly to an upside-down perch and orient its abdomen at an optimum angle for spore disperal.  An ant-fluke called Dicrocoelium takes control of its host each night, riding it to the top of a convenient stalk of grass and freezing it there until morning in hopes that some other hapless host will eat it.  And yes, Toxoplasma really does cause rats to lose their fear of cats (and in some cases, to actually be attracted to the smell of cat urine).  It is also found in about half the members of our species.  This stuff is straight out of The Puppet Masters, folks.  There's even a substantial amount of evidence to suggest that sex itself evolved primarily as a countermeasure against parasite attacks24.


Anemone/Maelstrom

First, the Wilderness.  The Internet is already more like a wildlife habitat than you might expect.  Internet "storms" were first described in 199725, which makes them old news:  nowadays you can link to "weather maps" of Internet meteorology26, updated several times daily.  (Once again, my far-flung futuristic foresight has proven wonderfully adept at predicting the past.  The last time was when Starfish predicted submarine ecotours to deep-sea rifts within fifty years, only to have such tours advertised in the real world by 1999.)

Those of you who have taken an undergraduate physiology course may remember the power law.  It's a surface-area-to-volume relationship that governs living systems from whole food webs right down to the capillaries of shrews—essentially a pattern typical of self-organizing systems (i.e., biological) systems.  As it turns out, the World Wide Web itself appears to be evolving in concordance with this law27.  Something to think about…  

Second, the Wildlife.  These days it's hardly necessary to cite references on the subject of "artificial life": a web search on the phrase (or on "cellular automata") will demonstrate how massively the field has exploded over the past ten years.  That subset of e-life which goes by the name "Anemone" is admittedly a bit more speculative, and based upon two premises.  The first is that simple systems, in aggregate, display emergent behaviors beyond the capability of their individual parts.  This is pretty much self-evident within a body—who'd deny that a brain is smarter than an individual neuron, for example?—but the principal extends even to aggregations of completely unconnected individuals.  A school of fish or a flock of birds can be thought of, in effect, as a diffuse neural net28,29.

A related premise is that lineages with genetically-determined behaviour would be able to pass a Turing test if they evolved fast enough.  This won't be hard to swallow for anyone familiar with how sophisticated such behaviour can be; we do, after all, live in a world where ants practice animal husbandry, birds follow orthodome routes to navigate halfway around the world, and honeybees convey sophisticated travel instructions by wiggling their asses at each other.  Skeptics might want to read any of E. O. Wilson's books on sociobiology, or an old Scientific American article by John Holland30.  It's way out of date, but it clearly conveys the principals behind genetic algorithms.

Finally, anyone who treats the phrase "group selection" as an obscenity (I admit they're right, most of the time) might first want to check out D.S. Wilson's review article of the subject in Skeptic31


Smart Gels

Research on the construction of thinking meat has proceeded apace since Starfish came out.  Recent research is thumbnailed in "Neurons and silicon get intimate", by Robert "no-not-that-Robert" Service32.  More conventional neural nets are literally in the driver's seat:  Carnegie Mellon's ALVINN program (which I mentioned briefly in the references to Starfish) has now moved moved onto the highway, where neural nets have autonomously taken ninety-mile jaunts on public highways, at speeds up to 70mph.  They learned to drive by watching people at the same task.  It took them less than five minutes.

We still can’t be sure exactly what neural nets actually learn when we train them.  Paradigm cock-ups of the sort that made my "head cheeses" betray their masters have happened in real life.  One infamous military neural net taught itself to distinguish between various ambient light conditions, while all along its humans thought they were teaching it to recognise tanks33. 


Ganzfeld Interrogation

Back in Starfish I cited Roger Penrose's quantum-consciousness theory to justify the rudimentary psi-powers of the rifters. Here in Maelstrom Lubin uses the same trick to interrogate Achilles Desjardins.  In the interest of full disclosure I should admit that Penrose's theory has come under serious attack from a guy called Tegmark34:  the quantum-mind afficionados have rallied35, but things may be looking a bit iffier on the quantum-consciousness front these days.  What can you do.


Haunted by Happiness

Lenie Clarke's "hallucinations" are loosely based on Bonnet's Syndrome36, a malady which sometimes results from macular degeneration.  The brain really does compensate for loss of visual input by inserting images from visual memory into the gaps.  In real life, Bonnet's Syndrome tends to occur in elderly patients, and is frequently associated with bereavement; the hallucinations are more-or-less seamlessly incorporated into the visual environment (as opposed to the picture-in-picture format Lenie experienced).


Finally…

If you want a more luminous taste of all this stuff, check out my Rifter website.  It's at 

xxxxxxxxxxxx



?ehemoth
Part 2:  Seppuku
Peter Watts

In memory of Chuckwalla,
1994-2001

A victim of technology running amok (i.e., over).

Author's Note

STOP RIGHT THERE!

This is not a complete novel.  It is the last half of "Behemoth", the third book in my "rifters" trilogy, which has been released in two parts.  If you haven't read Part 1 ("?ehemoth:  ?-Max"), you should do so before embarking on this book.  Otherwise this plot and these characters will make little or no sense.  (Actually, that may be true even if you have read Part 1, but in that case there's nothing I can do for you.)
"?ehemoth:  ?-Max" also contains an Author's Note explaining the reasons for this two-part release.  The short version is:  it's an unavoidable  consequence of recent changes in the North American publishing industry.
The shorter version is:  it's not my fault. 
Seppuku	5
Dune	6
Nightingale	16
Condom	29
Gehenna	34
The Trigonometry of Salvation	48
Migration	59
Karma	68
DisArmor	78
Stargazer	93
Sleeper	102
Parsimony	116
Corral	121
Turncoat	126
Crash	136
The Skill of the Chase	142
Remedial Ed	147
Decirculate	150
Paranoid	159
Matrioska	167
Basement Wiring	177
Splice	183
The Hamilton Iterations	194
Toggle	197
Fleas	207
Firebreathers	212
In Kind	223
Expiration Date	238
Bastille	244
Empath	264
Epilog:  Not God Emperor of Starfish	285
Acknowledgements	286
Notes and references	289


 Seppuku


"The essence of humanity's spiritual dilemma is that we evolved genetically to accept one truth and discovered another."
—E.O. Wilson

 
—W.D. Hamilton

DUNE
Their course is a schizoid amalgam of conflicting priorities, the need for speed scraping incompatibly against the drive to survive.  Phocoena  runs silent out of Atlantis, threading her way between peaks and canyons that cover and impede her progress in equal measure.  To Lenie Clarke it seems as though their compass bearing at any given moment could be the work of a random number generator; but over time the net vector resolves to southwest.
At some point Lubin decides that they're safely out of the neighborhood.  Haste becomes the better part of discretion; Phocoena climbs into open water.  She skims west down the slopes of the Mid Atlantic Ridge, occasionally twisting this way or that to avoid moguls the size of orbital lifters.  Mountains give way to foothills; foothills, to a vast endless expanse of mud.  Clarke sees none of it through the ports, of course—Lubin hasn't bothered to turn on the outside lights—but the topography scrolls past on the nav panel in a garish depth-synched spectrum.  Jagged red peaks, so high that their tips almost rise above darkness, are well out of range behind them.  Transitional slopes, segueing indiscernibly from yellow to green, fade to stern.  The abyssal plain flows beneath them like an endless blue carpet, hypnotic and restful.
She dozes.  When she opens her eyes again the cockpit glows with diffuse emerald light.  Phocoena has four bow ports, two dorsal two ventral, great perspex teardrops radiating back from the nose.  A dim green void presses down on the upper ports; below, a corrugated expanse of sand rushes past beneath Clarke's footrest.
Lubin has disabled the color-coding on the nav display; Phocoena races up a gentle monochrome slope.  The depth gauge reads 70m and rising.
"How long have I been sleeping?" Clarke asks.
"Few hours.  You just missed the Gully."  Fresh red scars radiate from the corners of Lubin's eyes, the visible aftermath of an operation that slid neuroelectric inlays into his optic nerves.  Clarke still winces inwardly at the sight; she's not sure she would've trusted the corpse surgeons even if they are all on the same side now.  Lubin obviously thought the additional data-gathering capacity was worth the risk.  Or maybe it was just one of those extras he'd always wanted, but hadn't been cleared for in his past life. 
"We're at Sable already?" Clarke says.
"Almost."
She whistles.  "She really moves."  No big surprise:  they chose Phocoena for her recon attributes.  Still.  The last time Clarke traversed any kind of real distance underwater, it took her the better part of a week to swim three hundred kilometers.  Phocoena has just covered ten times that distance in under a day.
Bleating from the nav panel:  hard echo up the slope at two o'clock.  Lubin throttles back and slews to starboard.  Centrifugal force swings Clarke to the side.
Thirty meters.  The sea outside looks bright and cold.  It's like staring into green glass.  Phocoena crawls up the slope at a few sluggish knots, sniffing northwest towards a wireframe assemblage of tubes and struts swelling on nav.  Clarke leans forward, peers through shafts of murky light.  Nothing.
"What's the viz out there?" she wonders.
Lubin, intent on his piloting, doesn't look over.  "Eight point seven."
Twenty meters from the surface.  The water ahead darkens suddenly, as though an eclipse were in progress.  An instant later the darkness resolves into the toe of a giant:  the rounded end of a cylindrical structure half-buried in drifting sand, fuzzed with sponges and seaweed, curving away into the indefinite distance.  Nav pegs it at eight meters high.
"I thought it floated," Clarke says.
Lubin pulls back on the stick:  Phocoena climbs into the water alongside the structure.  "They beached it when the well ran dry."
So this great sunken pontoon must be flooded.  Girders and struts stand on its upper surface, a monstrous scaffold rising into daylight.  Lubin maneuvers the sub between them as though threading a needle.  Nav shows them entering a submerged arena enclosed by four such structures arranged in a square.  Clarke can see their dim outlines through the water.  Pylons and trusses rise on all sides like the bars of a cage.
Phocoena breaks the surface.  The outside world ripples as water sheets down the acrylic, then wavers into focus.  They've come up directly beneath the rig; its underbelly forms a metal sky a little less than ten meters overhead, held from the earth by a network of support pylons.
Lubin climbs from his seat and grabs a fanny pack off a nearby utility hook.  "Back in a few minutes," he says, popping the dorsal hatch.  He climbs away.  Clarke hears a splash through the opening.
He still isn't happy about her presence here.  She ignores his safe-distancing maneuver and rises to follow.
The air wafting through the hatch blows cold against her face.  She climbs onto the sub's back and looks around.  The sky—what she can see of it, through the girders and pylons—is gray and overcast;  the ocean beneath is gunmetal to the horizon.  But there are sounds, behind her.  A distant, pulsing roar.  A faint squawking, like some kind of alarm.  It's familiar, but she can't quite put her finger on it.  She turns.
Land.
A strip of sandy shore, maybe fifty meters past the jacket of the rig.  She can see tufts of weathered, scrubby brush above the high-tide line.  She can see moraines of driftwood, pushed into little strips along the beach.  She can see surf, pounding endlessly against it all.
She can hear birds, calling.  She'd almost forgotten.
Not N'Am, of course.  The mainland's still a good two or three hundred kilometers away.  This is just a way station, some lonely little archipelago on the Scotian Shelf.  And yet, to see living things without either fins or fists—she marvels at the prospect, even as she marvels at her own unexpected overreaction.
A steep metal staircase winds up around the nearest pylon.  Clarke dives into the ocean, not bothering with hood or gloves.  The Atlantic slaps her the face, a delicious icy sting across her exposed skin.  She  revels in the sensation, crosses to the pylon in a few strokes.
The stairs lead onto a walkway that appears to run around the perimeter of the rig.  Wind strums the cables of the railing; the structure clatters like some arrhythmic percussion instrument.  She reaches an open hatchway, peers into the rig's dark interior:  a segmented metal corridor, bundles of pipe and fiberop running along the ceiling like plexii of nerves and arteries, a t-junction at the far end leading off  to unknown, opposite destinations.  Wet footprints on the deck lead in here, and turn left.  Clarke follows.
Sound and vision fade as she penetrates deeper into the hulk.  Bulkheads muffle the sound of the surf and the miraculous squawking of the gulls.  Her enhanced vision fares better—the bright overcast from outside follows her around a half-dozen corners, peeps in here and there through portholes at the end of unexplored corridors—but the desaturation of color in her surroundings tells her that she's moving through darkness too deep for dryback eyes.  That reversion to black-and-white must be why she didn't notice it sooner—dark streaks on the walls and floors could be anything, from rust to the remains of an overenthusiastic game of paintball.  But now, following the last smudged footprints to a hatch yawning open in the bulkhead, the realization sinks in:
Carbon scoring.  Something's burned this whole section.
She steps through the hatch into what must have been someone's quarters, judging by the bunk-bed frame and the bedside table that occupies one modest wall.  Frames, skeletal remnants of furniture, are all that's left.  If there were ever mattresses or sheets or blankets here, they're gone now.  Every surface is coated in dark greasy soot.
From somewhere out in the hall, the creak of metal hinges.
Clarke steps back into the corridor and tracks the sound.  By the time it stops she's got a fix, and a beacon—light, bouncing dimly back down the passageway from around a corner just ahead.  That way was dark and silent when she stepped into the cabin; now, she can even hear distant waves.
She follows the light.  Finally she comes to an open hatch at the base of a companionway, leading up.  Ocean breeze sneaks past her into the rig, carrying the sound of seabirds and the wet rubbery scent of Ascophyllum.  For a moment she's taken aback; the light pours down from the head of the stairs, easily bright enough to bring color back into the world, and yet the walls are still—
Oh.
The polymer around the lip of the hatch has bubbled and burned; all that remains are lumpy, flaking clots of carbon.  Clarke pulls experimentally at the wheel; the hatch scarcely moves, screeching softly against the deposits caking its hinges.
She rises again into daylight, and devastation.
It's a small rig, as such things were measured.  Nowhere near the city-sized monstrosities that once  crowded the ocean hereabouts.  Perhaps, by the time it was built, oil was already falling out of fashion; or perhaps there simply wasn't enough left to warrant a bigger investment.  For whatever reason, the main hull is only two stories thick along most of its length; and now Clarke rises onto the wide-open expanse of its roof.
The rig's deck stretches over half the area of a city block. There's an elevated helipad at the far end, and a crane whose tendons have been cut; it lies across the deck at a messy angle, struts and crossbeams slightly crumpled on impact.  The derrick at the nearer end is relatively intact, thrusting into the sky like a wireframe phallus.  Clarke rises in its shadow, into something that was once a control hut of some kind.  Now it's a rectangular ruin; none of the four walls remain intact, and the roof itself has been thrown halfway across the deck.  There were control panels and electronics here once—she recognizes the general outlines of half-melted instrumentation.
This is how completely the hut has been destroyed:  Lenie Clarke can simply step onto the main deck over what's left of the walls. 
All this space, this uninterrupted visibility, unsettles her.  For five years she has hidden beneath the heavy, comforting darkness of the North Atlantic, but up here—up here, she can see all the way to the edge of the world.  She feels naked, like a target:  visible from infinite distance.
Lubin is a small figure on the far side of the platform, his back turned, leaning on the western railing.  Clarke walks towards him, skirting the wreckage, suddenly oblivious to the wheeling of the gulls.  She nears the edge, fights momentary vertigo:  Sable Archipelago spreads out before her, an insignificant chain of sandy dots in the middle of the ocean.  The nearest looks big enough from here, though, its spine sheathed in brownish vegetation, its beach stretching almost out of sight to the south.  Off in that distance, Clarke thinks she sees tiny specks in vague motion.
Lubin's wearing a pair of binoculars, panning his head slowly from side to side.  Scanning the island.  He doesn't speak as Clarke joins him on the railing.
"Did you know them?" she asks softly.
"Perhaps.  I don't know who was out here when it happened."
I'm sorry, she almost says, but what's the point?
"Maybe they saw it coming," she suggests.  "Maybe they got away."
He doesn't look away from the shoreline.  The binocs extend from his eyes like tubular antennae.
"Should we be out in the open like this?" Clarke asks.
Lubin shrugs, startlingly, chillingly indifferent to security.
She looks down along the shoreline.  The moving specks are a bit larger now, some kind of animals from the look of it.  They appear to be moving this way.
"When do you suppose it happened?"  Somehow, it seems important to keep him talking.
"It's been almost a year since we got a signal from them," he says.  "Could've been any time since then."
"Could've been last week," Clarke remarks.  There was once a time when their allies were much more faithful in their correspondence.  Even so, extended silence doesn't always mean anything.  You had to wait until no one was listening.  You had to be careful not to give the game away.  Both corpse and rifter contacts went dark now and then, back in the early days.  Even now, after a year of silence, it's not unreasonable to keep hoping for news, someday.  Any day. 
Except now, of course.  Except from here.
"Two months ago," Lubin says.  "At least."
She doesn't ask how he knows.  She follows his magnified gaze back to shore.
Oh my God.
"They're horses," she whispers, amazed.  "Wild horses.  Holy shit."
The animals are close enough now to be unmistakable.  An image comes to her, unbidden:  Alyx in prison, Alyx saying this is the best place I could possibly be.  Clarke wonders what she'd say now, seeing these wild things.  
On second thought, it probably wouldn't impress her.  She was a corpse kid, after all. She'd probably toured the world a dozen times before she was eight.  Maybe even had a horse of her own.
The herd stampedes along the beach.  "What are they doing out here?" Clarke wonders.  Sable wasn't even a proper island back before the rising seas partitioned it;  it's never been more than a glorified sand dune, crawling around the outer edges of the Shelf's exhausted oil fields under the influence of wind and currents.  She can't even see trees or shrubs on this particular island, just a mane of reedy grass running along its backbone.  It seems absurd that such an insignificant speck of land could support creatures so large. 
"Seals, too."  Lubin points along the shore to the north, although whatever he sees is too distant for Clarke's unmagnified vision.  "Not to mention the birds and vegetation."
The dissonance of it sinks in.  "Why the sudden interest in wildlife, Ken?  I never took you for a nature lover."
"It's all healthy," he says.
"What?"
"No carcasses, no skeletons.  Nothing even looks sick."  Lubin slips the binocs from his skull and slides them back into his fanny pack.  "The grass is rather brown, but I suspect that's normal."  He sounds almost disappointed for some—
?ehemoth, she realizes.  That's what he's looking for.  Hoping for.  But Sable is healthy.  Sable is unburned.  Which means the destruction around them has nothing to do with ecological containment. 
Lubin turns and walks back along the platform.  Clarke follows.  Wind slices around her, frigid and biting; she could almost swear she feels its teeth through the diveskin, although that must be her imagination.  Nearby, some accidental wind-tunnel of pipes and plating moans as if haunted.
"What month is it?" she asks aloud.
"June."  Lubin's heading for the helipad.
It seems a lot colder than it should be.  Maybe this is what passes for balmy since the Gulf Stream shut down.  Clarke's never been able to wrap her head around that paradox:  that global warming should somehow have turned eastern Europe into Siberia...
Metal stairs lead up to the pad.  But Lubin, reaching them, doesn't climb; he steps behind them and drops to one knee, intent on the underside of the frame.  Clarke bends down at his side.  She sees nothing but scraped, painted metal.
Lubin sighs.  "You should go back," he says.
"Not a chance."
"Past this point I won't be able to return you.  I can afford a forty-six hour delay more than I can afford someone slowing me down once we get to the mainland."
"We've been over this, Ken.  What makes you think I'm going to be any easier to convince now?"
"Things are worse than I expected."
"How, exactly?  It's already the end of the world."
He points at a spot under the stairs where the paint's been scraped off.
Clarke shrugs.  "I don't see anything."
"Right."  Lubin turns and starts back towards the scorched remains of the control hut.
She sets out after him.  "So?"
"I left a backup recorder behind.  Looked like a rivet."  He brings his hand out, holds thumb and forefinger close together, almost touching, for scale.   "Even painted it over.  I would never have been able to find it."  The forefinger extends; Lubin's pointing hand describes an imaginary line between hut and staircase.  "Nice short line-of-sight to minimize power consumption.  Omnidirectional broadcast; impossible to backtrack.  Enough memory for a week's worth of routine chatter, plus anything they might have sent our way."
"That's not much," Clarke remarks.
"It wasn't a long-term record.   When it ran out of new memory it overwrote the old."
A black box, then.  A moving record of the recent past.  "So you were expecting something like this," she surmises.
"I was expecting that if something happened, I'd at least be able to retrieve some kind of log.  I wasn't expecting to lose the recorder.  I was the only one who knew it was there.  I didn't even tell the people who were stationed here."
They've returned to the radio shack.  The blackened door frame still stands, an absurd rectangle rising from the rubble.  Lubin, perhaps out of some cryptic respect for standard procedure, passes through it.  Clarke simply steps over the knee-high tatters of the nearest wall.
Something snaps and cracks around her ankle.  She looks down.  Her foot is imprisoned in a blackened human ribcage, her leg emerging from a shattered hole where the sternum used to be.  She can feel the knobs and projections of the spine underfoot, brittle and crumbling under the slightest weight.
If there's a skull—or arms or legs—they must be buried in the surrounding rubble.
Lubin watches while she pulls her foot from the remains.  Something glitters behind his eyecaps.
"Whoever's behind this," he says, "is smarter than me."
His face isn't really expressionless.  It just looks that way to the uninitiated.  But Lenie Clarke has learned to read him, after a fashion, and Lubin doesn't look worried or upset to her.  He looks excited. 
She nods, undeterred. "So you need all the help you can get."
She follows him down.
NIGHTINGALE
It seemed as if they came out of the ground itself.  Sometimes that was literally true:  increasing numbers lived in the sewers and storm drains now, as if a few meters of concrete and earth could hold back what heaven and earth had failed to.  Most of the time, though, it was only appearance.  Taka Ouellette's mobile infirmary would pull up at some municipal crossroads, near some ramshackle collection of seemingly-abandoned houses and strip malls which nonetheless disgorged a listless trickle of haggard occupants, long past hope but willing to go through the motions in whatever time they had left.  They were the unlucky unconnected who hadn't made it into a PMZ.  They were the former skeptics who hadn't realized until too late that this was the real thing.  They were the fatalists and the empiricists who looked back over the previous century and wondered why it had taken this long for the world to end.
They were the people barely worth saving.  Taka Ouellette did her best.  She was the person barely competent to save them.
Rossini wafted from the cab behind her.  Ouellette’s next case staggered forward, oblivious to the music, a woman who might once have been described as middle-aged:  loose-skinned, stiff-limbed, legs moving on some semifunctional autopilot.  One of them nearly buckled as she approached, sent the whole sad body lurching to one side.  Ouellette reached out but the woman caught herself at the last moment, kept upright more through accident than effort.  Both cheeks were swollen bruised pillows: the rheumy eyes above them seemed fixed on some indeterminate point between zenith and horizon.  Her right hand was an infected claw, curled around an oozing gash.
Ouellette defocused on the gross ravages and zoomed down to the subtler ones: two melanomas visible on the left arm; tremors in the right; some dark tracery that looked like blood poisoning, creeping up the wrist from the injured palm.  The usual symptoms of malnutrition.  Half of the signs were consistent with ehemoth; none were incontrovertible.  Here was a woman suffering violence across several orders of magnitude.
Ouellette tried on a professional smile, although the fit had never been a good one.  "Let's see if we can't get you fixed up."
"That's okay," said the woman, stargazing.  Ouellette tried to guide her towards the van with one gloved hand (not that she needed the gloves, of course, but these days it wasn't wise to remind people of such things).  The woman jerked away at her touch—
"That's okay.  That's okay—"
 —staggered against some invisible wall and stumbled off, locked on heaven, oblivious to earth.
"That's okay…"
Ouellette let her go.
The next patient wasn't conscious and wouldn't have been able to move if he had been.  He arrived on a makeshift stretcher, an oozing jigsaw of lesions and twitches, short-circuiting nerves and organs that hadn't bothered waiting for the heart to give out before starting to rot.  The  sickly-sweet smell of fermented urine and feces hung around him like a shroud.  His kidneys and his liver were in a race to kill him first.  She couldn't lay odds on the winner.
A man and two children of indeterminate sex had dragged this breathing corpse before her.  Their own faces and hands were uncovered, in oblivion or defiance of the half-assed protective measures promoted by endless public-service announcements.
She shook her head.  "I'm sorry.  It's end-stage."
They stared back at her, eyes filled with a pleading desperate hope that verged on insanity.
"I can kill him for you," she whispered.  "I can cremate him.  That's all I can do."
Still they didn't move.
Oh, Dave.  Thank God you died before it came to this...
"Do you understand?" she said.  "I can't save him."
That was nothing new.  When it came to ehemoth, she wasn't saving anybody.

#
 
She could have, of course.  If she were suicidal.  
Protection against ?ehemoth came packaged in a painstaking and complex series of genetic retrofits, an assembly line that took days—but there was no technical reason why it couldn't be crammed into a portable rig and taken on the road.  A few people had done that very thing, not so long ago.  They'd been torn limb from limb by hordes too desperate to wait in line,  who didn't trust that supply would exceed demand if they'd only be patient a little while longer.
By now, those places that offered a real cure were all fortresses built to withstand the desperation of mobs, built to enforce the necessary patience.  Further from those epicenters Taka Ouellette and her kind could walk among the sick without fear of sickness; but it would have been be a death sentence to offer a cure so far from back-up.  The most she could do here was bestow quick-and-dirty retrovirals, half-assed tweaks that might allow some to survive the wait for a real cure.  All she could risk was to slow the process of dying.
She didn't complain.  In more complacent times, she knew, she might not have been trusted to do even that much.  That hardly made her unique:  fifty percent of all medical personnel graduate in the bottom half of their class.  It didn't matter nearly as much as it once had.
Even now, though, there was a hierarchy.  The ivy-leaguers, the Nobel laureates, the Meatzarts—those had long since ascended into heaven on CSIRA's wings.  There they worked in remote luxury, every cutting-edge resource within easy reach, intent on saving what remained of the world.
One tier down were the betas: the solid, reliable splice-and dicers, the gel-jocks, no award-winners here but no great backlog of malpractice suits either.  They labored in the castles that had accreted around every source of front-line salvation.  The assembly line wound through those fortifications like a perverse GI tract.  The sick and the dying were swallowed at one end, passed through loops and coils of machinery that stabbed and sampled and doused them with the opposite of digestive enzymes:  genes and chemicals that soaked the liquefying flesh to make it whole again.
The passage through salvation's bowels was an arduous one, eight days from ingestion to defecation.  The line was long but not wide:  economies of scale were hard to come by in the post-corporate landscape.  Only a fraction of the afflicted would ever be immunized.  But those lucky few owed their lives to the solid, unremarkable worker bees of the second tier.
And then there was Taka Ouellette, who could barely remember a time when she'd been a member of the hive.? If it hadn't been for that one piece of decontamination protocol, carelessly applied, she might still be working the line in Boston.  If not for that small slip Dave and Crys might still be alive.  There  was really no way of knowing for sure.  There was only doubt, and what-if.  And the fading memory of life as an endocrinologist, and a wife, and a mother.
Now she was just a foot soldier, patrolling the outlands with her hand-me-down mobile clinic and her cut-rate, stale-dated miracles.  She hadn't been paid in months, but that was okay.  The room and board was free, at least, and anyway she wouldn't be welcome back in Boston any time soon:  she might be immune to ?ehemoth but she could still carry it.  That was okay too.  This was enough to keep her busy.  It was enough to keep her alive.

#

Finally, silently, the breathing corpse had been withdrawn from competition.  Subsequent contenders hadn't rubbed her nose quite so deeply in her own ineffectuality.  For the past few hours she'd been treating more tumors than plague victims.   That was unusual, this far from a PMZ.  Still, cancers could be excised.  It was simple work, drone work.  The kind of work she was good for.
So here she was, handing out raf-1 angiogenesis blockers and retrovirii in a blighted, wilting landscape where DNA itself was on the way out.  There was some green out there, if you looked hard enough.  It was springtime, after all.  ?ehemoth always died back a bit during the winter, gave the old tenants a chance to sprout and bloom each new year before coming back to throttle the competition.  And Maine was about as far as you could get from the initial Pacific incursion without getting your feet wet.  Go any further and you'd need a boat and a really good scrambler to keep the missiles off your back.
These days, of course, keeping to land was no longer any guarantee that the EurAfricans wouldn't be shooting at you.  There'd been a time when they'd only shot at targets trying to cross the pond; but given a half-dozen landside missile attacks since Easter they were obviously itching for more effective containment.  It was a wonder that the whole seaboard hadn't been slagged to glass by now.  If the dispatches could be believed, N'Am's defenses were still keeping the worst of it back.  Still.  The defenses wouldn't hold forever.
Rossini surrendered to Handel.  Ouellette's line-up was growing.  Perhaps three people accumulated for every two she processed.  Nothing to worry about, yet; there was a critical mass, some threshold of personal responsibility below which crowds almost never got ugly.  These ones didn't look like they had the strength to go bad even if they'd been motivated to.
At least the pharms had stopped charging for the meds she dispensed.  They hadn't wanted to, of course:  hey, did anyone think the R&D for all these magic potions had been free?  In the end, though, there hadn't been much choice.  Even small crowds got really ugly when you demanded payment up front.
A forearm the size of a tree trunk, disfigured by the usual maladies:  the leprous, silver tinge of stage-one ?ehemoth, a smattering of melanomas, and—
Wait a second.  That's odd.  The swelling and redness was consistent with an infected insect bite, but the puncture marks...
She looked up at the face above the arm.  A leather-skinned man in his fifties looked back through eyes blotchy with burst capillaries.  For a moment it seemed as though his very bulk was blotting out the light, but no—it was only dusk, creeping in overhead while she'd been otherwise occupied.
"What did this?" she asked.
"Bug."  He shook his head.  "Last week sometime.  Itches like a bugger."
"But there's four holes."  Two bites?  Two sets of mandibles on a single bug? 
"Had about ten legs, too.  Weird little bugger.  Seen 'em around once or twice.  Never got bit before, though."  His red eyes squinted with sudden concern.  "It poisonous?"
"Probably not."  Taka probed the swelling.  Her patient grimaced, but whatever had bitten him didn't seem to have left anything embedded.  "Not seriously, not if it happened last week.  I can give you something for the infection.  It's pretty minor, next to…"
"Yeah," her patient said.
She smeared a bit of antibiotic onto the swelling.  " I can give you a shot of antihistamines," she said apologetically, "but the effects won't last, I'm afraid.  If the itching gets too bad afterward you could always piss on it."
"Piss on it?"
"Topical urea's good for itching," Taka told him.  She held up a loaded cuvette; he made the requisite blood offering.  "Now if you just—"
"I know the drill."  
A tunnel, a slightly squashed cylinder big enough for a body,  pierced the MI from one side to the other—a pair of opposed oval mouths, connected by a sensor-lined throat.  A pallet extended from the floor of the nearer mouth like a padded rectangular tongue.  Taka's patient lay back on it; the van listed slightly under his weight.  The pallet retracted with an electrical hum. Slowly, smoothly, the man disappeared into one mouth and extruded from the other.  He was luckier than some.  Some went in and never came out.  The tunnel doubled as a crematorium.
Taka kept one eye on the NMR readouts, the other on the blood work.  From time to time, both eyes flickered uneasily to the growing line of patients.
"Well?" came the man's voice from the other side of the van.
He'd been here before, she saw.  Her sideshow tweaks had already taken hold in his cells.
And his Stage-One was still advancing.
"Well, you know about your melanomas, obviously," she remarked as he came around the corner.  She drew a time-release raf-1 from the dispensary and loaded it up.  "This'll starve the tumors on your skin, and a few others cooking inside you probably didn't know about.  I take it you've been in a clave recently, or a PMZ?"
He grunted.  "Came here a month back.  Maybe two."
"Uh huh."  The static-field generators installed in such places were a mixed blessing at best.  Bathing in that kind of field for any length of time was guaranteed to set tumors blooming in the flesh like mushrooms in shit.  Most people considered it the lesser evil, even though the fields didn't so much repel ?ehemoth as merely impede it.  
Taka didn't ask what had inspired this man to abandon that leaky protection for enemy territory.  Such decisions were seldom voluntary.
He offered his arm:  she shot the capsule sub-q, just over the bicep.  "There are a couple of other tumors, I'm afraid.  Not so vascularised.  I can burn them out, but you'll have to wait until I'm a little less busy.  There's no real hurry."
"What about the witch?" he said.
Firewitch, he meant.  ?ehemoth.
"Um, according to your blood work you've already taken the cocktail," Taka said, pretending to recheck the results.
"I know.  Last fall."  He coughed.  "I'm still getting sick."
"Well if you were infected last fall, it's doing its job.  You'd have been dead by winter without it."
"But I'm still getting sick."  He took a step towards her, a big, big man, his bloody eyes narrowed down to red slits.  Behind him, others waited with limited patience.
"You should go to Bangor," she began. "That's the closest—"
"They won't even tell you the wait at Bangor," he spat. 
"What I can do here, what I—it's not a cure," she explained carefully.  "It's only supposed to buy you some time."
"It did.  So buy me more."
She took a cautious, placating step backwards.  One step closer to the voice-command pickup for Miri's defense systems.  One step away from trouble.
Trouble stepped after her.
"It doesn't work like that,"  Taka said softly.  "The resistance is already in your cells.  Putting it in again won't do anything.  I guarantee it."
 For a moment, she thought he might back off.  The words seemed to penetrate; the tension ebbed a bit from his posture.  The lines around his eyes seemed to twist somehow, some less-volatile mix of confusion and hurt replacing the fear and anger that had been there before.
And then he removed all hope with the hardest smile she'd ever seen.  
"You're cured," he said, and moved.
It was an occupational hazard.  Out here, some believed that resistance could be transmitted through sexual contact.  That made it easy to get laid, if you were into such things: there were those who held the Immunized in almost cultish esteem,  begged sexual congress as a form of inoculation.  It was something of a joke among Taka's peers.
Somewhat less amusing were the tales of field medics held prisoner, raped repeatedly in the name of public health.  Taka Ouellette had no intention of offering herself to the greater good.
Neither did the thing she unleashed.

#

The password was Bagheera.  Taka had no idea what it meant; it had come with the van and she'd never bothered to change it.
The chain of events it was supposed to trigger stopped far short of total commitment.  On hearing its master's call, the MI's defenses would snap to attention:  all ports and orifices would slam shut and lock tight, with the exception of the cab door closest to the authorized operator.  The weapons blister on Miri's roof —a sunken, mirrored hemisphere when at rest— would extend from its silo like a gleaming chrome phallus, high enough for a clear shot at anyone not flattened defensively against the sides of the vehicle itself.  (For any who might be, the chassis itself could come alive with high-voltage electricity.)  Primary weaponry started with a tightbeam infrasonic squawkbox capable of voiding bowels and stomachs at ten meters.  Escalation would call on twin gimbaled 8000-Watt direct-diode lasers which could be tuned to perforate or merely blind; nonprojectile weapons were always favored because of the ammunition issue.  However, to guard against the risk of laser-defeating mirrors and aerosols, ancillary projectile weapons were usually made available to the savvy field doctor; Taka's rig also fired darts primed with a conotoxin tweaked for ten-second respiratory paralysis.
None of this was supposed to fire automatically.  Bagheera should only have brought those systems into full alert, countered one threat with a greater one, and given any aggressor the chance to back off before anyone got hurt.  There should have been no escalation absent Taka's explicit command.
"Bagheera," she growled.
The lasers cut loose.
They didn't fire at the red-eyed man.  They started slicing through the lineup behind him.  Half a dozen people fell bisected, cauterized, their troubles suddenly over.  Others stared disbelieving at neat, smoking holes in their limbs and torsos. On the far side of a sudden barbequed jigsaw, brown grass burst into flame.  Water Music played on in the background without missing a beat.
After a moment that seemed to go on forever, people remembered to scream.
The Red-eyed man, all threat and bluster gone from his body, stood dumbfounded and pincushioned by a dozen neurotoxic darts.  He gaped soundlessly at Taka, teetering.  He raised his hands, palms up, supplicating:  goddamn woman, I never meant…!
He toppled, rigid with tetanus.
People ran, or twitched, or lay still.  The lasers dipped and weaved, scrawling blackened gibberish onto the ground.  Fire guttered here and there among the curlicues, bright staccatos against the failing light.
Taka pulled frantically at the passenger door; fortunately the renegade system hadn't charged the hull.  It had locked her out, though; this was the door that was supposed to stay unlocked, the route to refuge—
It's online how in God's name can it be online —
But she could see the telltale on her dashboard, flashing scarlet.  The MI was somehow uplinked to the wide wireless world, to the networked monsters that lived and hunted in there, to—
A Madonna.  A Lenie.  It had to be.
Another telltale winked from a different part of the dashboard. Belatedly, Taka read the signs:  the driver's door was unlocked.  She threw herself around the front of the vehicle.  She kept her eyes on the ground, some religious impulse averting them from the wrath of God, if I don't see it maybe it won't see me but she could hear the turret just above her, tracking and firing, tracking and—
She piled into the cab, yanked the door behind her, locked it.
The cab's eyephones lay on the floor beside the seat.   A tiny aurora of light writhed across the deck from its oculars.  She snatched up the phones and held them to her face.
The Madonna's twisted face raged within an inset on the main display.  There was no sound—Taka left the headset muted by default.  
Shitsucker.  It got in through GPS.  She always kept GPS offline when she wasn't traveling; somehow the invader must have spoofed the system.  
She killed nav.  The screaming thing in the window went out.  Overhead, the lasers ceased fire with a downshifting whine.
Water Music had ended sometime during the massacre.  Tchaikovsky had stepped into the gap.  Iolanta.
It seemed like a very long while before she dared to move.
She killed the music.  She hugged herself, shaking.  She tried very hard not to cry like a frightened child.  She told herself she'd done what she could.
She told herself it could have been worse.
Madonnas could do almost anything in their own environment.  Cruising through the walls and the wires and the wavelengths of N'AmNet they could penetrate almost any system, subvert almost any safeguard, bring down almost any calamity upon the heads of people for whom disaster had long since become the status quo.  Just the week before, one had breached the flood-control subroutines of some dam in the Rockies, emptied a whole reservoir onto an unsuspecting populace sleeping in the spillway's shadow.
Forcing access into one lousy MI would have been simplicity itself to such a creature.
It hadn't downloaded, at least.  No room.  Neither nav nor weapons-system chips were anywhere near big enough to support something so complex, and the medical systems—the only habitat in the van that could hold something that size—were kept manually disconnected from the net except for prearranged updates.  The monsters could do a lot of things in virtual space, but they hadn't yet figured out how to reach into the real world and physically flip a switch.  So this one had simply extended long, vicious fingers from some faraway node, wreaking havoc from a distance until Taka had cut it off.
Her own dim image stared back, haunted and hollow-eyed, from the darkened dashboard.  The perspex, subtly convex, stretched her reflection lengthwise, turned gaunt into downright attenuate.  A fragile refugee from some low-gravity planet, civilized and genteel.  Banished to a hellish world where even your own armor turned against you. 
What if I— she thought, and stopped herself.
Wearily, she unlocked the door and climbed out onto the killing floor.  There were still a fair number of patients in sight.  None were standing, of course.  Few moved.
What if I didn't—
"Hello!" she called to the empty streets and dark façades.  "It's okay!  It's gone!  I shut it out!"
Moans from the injured.  Nothing else.
"Anybody!  I could really use a hand here!  We've got—we've got…"
What if I didn't turn GPS off? 
She shook her head.  She always took it offline.  She didn't specifically remember doing it this particular time, but you never remembered rote stuff like that.  
"Anybody?"
Maybe you fucked up.  Wouldn't be the first time.
Would it, Dave?
It seemed so dark all of a sudden.  She raised her eyes from the carnage; twilight was bleeding away to the west.  
That was when she noticed the contrails.
CONDOM
Phocoena's bulkheads are luminous with intelligence.  The  periscope feed delivers crisp rich realtimes of the maritime nightscape:  dark sparkling waves in the foreground, black fingers of dry land reaching into the view from either side.  A jumble of bright buildings rises above the coastline in center screen, huddled together against the surrounding darkness.  Boxy unlit silhouettes to the south belie the remains of a whole other city south of the Narrows, abandoned in the course of some recent retreat.
The city of Halifax.  Or rather, the besieged city-state that Halifax has evidently become.
That naked-eye visual occupies the upper-left quarter of the main panel.  Beside it, a false-color interpretation of the same view shows a fuzzy, indistinct cloud enveloping the lit buildings; Clarke thinks of the mantle of a jellyfish, enclosing vital organs.  The shroud is largely invisible to human eyes, even rifter ones; to Phocoena's spectrum-spanning senses, it looks like a blue haze of heat lightning.  Static-field ionization, Lubin says.  A dome of electricity to keep airborne particles at bay. 
The seaward frontier is under guard.  Not that Clarke ever expected to simply sneak into the harbor and pull up next to the local clam shack; she knew there'd be some kind of security in place.  Lubin was expecting mines, so for the last fifty klicks Phocoena crawled towards the coast behind a couple of point drones zig-zagging ahead, luring any countermeasures out of concealment.  Those flushed a single burrower lying in wait;  awakened by the sound of approaching machinery, it shot from the mud and corkscrewed into the nearest drone with a harmless and anticlimactic clunk.  
That lone dud was the only countermeasure they came across on the outer slope.  Lubin figures that Halifax's subsurface defenses must have been used up fending off previous incursions.  The fact that they haven't been replenished doesn't bode well for the mass-production of industrial goods in the vicinity.  
At any rate, against all expectations they've cruised unchallenged all the way here, just outside Halifax Harbor.  Only to nearly run into this.   Whatever this is.
It's virtually invisible in the sub's lights.  It's even less visible to sonar, which can barely pick it up even at point-blank range.  A transparent, diaphanous membrane stretches from seabed to surface:  the periscope shows a float line holding its upper edge several meters above the  waves.  It appears to stretch across the entire mouth of the harbor. 
It billows inward, as if the Atlantic is leaning on it from the outside.  Pinpoint flashes of cold blue light sparkle across its face, sparse  ripples of stardust echoing the gentle subsurface surge.  Clarke recognizes the effect.  It's not the membrane that sparkles, but the tiny bioluminescent creatures colliding with it.
Plankton.  It seems somehow encouraging that they still exist, so close to shore.
Lubin's less interested in the  light show than its cause.  "Must be semipermeable."  That would explain the oceanographic impossibility that belied its presence, a sudden sharp halocline rising across their path like a wall.  Discrete boundaries are common enough in the sea:  brackish water lying atop heavier saline, warm water layered over cold.  But the stratification is always horizontal, a parfait of light-over-heavy as inevitable as gravity.  A vertical halocline seems to violate the very laws of physics;  the membrane itself may have been undetectable to sonar, but the sheer knife-edged discontinuity it produces showed up like a brick wall from a thousand meters away.
"Looks pretty flimsy,"  Clarke remarks.  "Not much to keep us out."
"It's not there for us," Lubin says.
"Well, yeah."  It's a ?ehemoth filter, obviously.  And it must be blocking a whole range of other particles too, to generate this kind of density imbalance.  "What I mean is, we can just punch right on through."
"I don't think so," Lubin says.
He brings the periscope down from the surface and sends it sniffing towards the barrier; on the panel, the cowering cityscape disappears in a swirl of bubbles and darkness.  Clarke glimpses the 'scope's tether through the viewport, a pale thread of fiberop unwinding overhead.  The periscope itself is effectively invisible, a small miracle of dynamic countershading.
Clarke watches it on tactical instead.  Lubin brings the drone to within half a meter of the membrane:  a faint yellow haze resolves on the right-hand feed, where naked eyes see only darkness.  "What's that?" Clarke wonders. 
"Bioelectric field," Lubin tells her.
"You mean it's alive?"
"Probably not the membrane itself.  I'd guess it's run through with some kind of engineered neurons."
"Really?  You sure?"
Lubin shakes his head.  "I'm not even sure it's biological—the field strength fits, but it doesn't prove anything."   He gives her a look.  "Did you think we had a sensor to pick up brain cells at fifty paces?"
No witty rejoinder springs to mind.  Clarke turns back to the viewport, and the dim blue aurora flickering beyond.  "Like an anorexic smart gel," she murmurs.
"Probably a lot dumber.  And a lot more radical—they'd have to tweak the neurons to work at low temperatures, high salinity—the membrane itself could handle osmoregulation, I suppose."
"I don't see any blood vessels.  I wonder how they get nutrients."
"Maybe the membrane handles that too.  Absorbs them right from seawater."
"What's it for?"
"Other than a filter?"  Lubin shrugs.  "An alarm, I should think."
"So what do we do?"
Lubin considers a moment.  "Poke it," he says.  
The periscope lunges forward.  On the wide-spectrum display the membrane flares on impact, bright threads radiating from the strike like a fine-veined tracery of yellow lightning.  In visible light it just floats there, inert.
"Mmm." Lubin pulls the periscope back. The membrane reverts to lowglow.
"So if it is an alarm," Clarke says, "I'm guessing you've just set it off."
"Not unless Halifax goes to red alert every time a piece of driftwood bumps their perimeter."  Lubin runs his finger along a control bar:  on tactical, the periscope heads back to the surface.  "But I am willing to bet this thing'll scream a lot louder if we actually tear through it.  We don't need that kind of attention."
"So what now?  Land down the coast a bit, try a land approach?"
Lubin shakes his head.  "Underwater was our best shot.  A landside approach will be a lot tougher."  He grabs a headset off the bulkhead and slips it over his skull.  "If we can't get to a hard line, we'll try the local wireless nets.  Better than nothing."
He cocoons himself and extends feelers into the attenuate datasphere overhead.  Clarke reroutes nav to the copilot's panel and turns Phocoena back into deeper water.  An extra klick or so shouldn't interfere with Lubin's trawl, and there's something disquieting about being in such shallow water.  It's like looking up to find the roof has crept down while you weren't looking.
Lubin grunts.  "Got something."
Clarke taps into Lubin's headset and splits the feed to her own panel.  Most of the stream's incomprehensible— numbers and statistics and acronyms, scrolling past too quickly for her to read even if she could make sense of them.  Either Lubin's dug beneath the usual user interfaces, or Maelstrom has become so impoverished in the past five years that it can't support advanced graphics any more.
But that can't be.  The system has room enough for her own demonic alter-egos, after all.  Those are nothing if not graphic.
"So what's it saying?" Clarke asks.
"Missile attack of some kind, down in Maine.  They're sending lifters." 
She gives up and pulls the 'phones from her eyes.
"That could be our best way in," Lubin muses.  "Any vehicles CSIRA deploys will be operating out of a secure site with access to good intel."
"And you think the pilot would be willing to pick up a couple of hitch-hikers in the middle of a contaminated zone?"
Lubin turns his head.  Faint lightning flickers around the edges of his eyephones, ephemeral tattoos laid over the scars on his cheeks.
"If there is a pilot," he says, "Perhaps he'll be open to persuasion."
GEHENNA
Taka Ouellette emerged into a nightscape of guttering flame.  She drove at a crawl through a hot dry snowfall, the windshield's static field barely keeping the flakes from the glass.  Ash flurried white as talc in Miri's headlights, a fog of powdered earth and vegetation blinding her to the road ahead.  She killed the lights, but infrared was even worse: countless particles of drifting soot, the brilliant washouts of raw flame, arid little dust-devils and writhing updrafts overloaded the display with false-color artefacts.  Finally she settled for an old set of photoamp glasses in the glove compartment.  The world resolved into black and white, gray on gray.  The viz was still terrible, but at least the interference was in sharp focus.
Maybe there were survivors, she told herself without much hope.  Maybe the firestorm didn't reach that far.  She was a good ten kilometers from the spot where her MI had risen up and slaughtered the locals.   There'd been no closer cover:  no storm sewers or parkades more than a few levels deep, and if there'd been any hardened shelters nearby her surviving patients wouldn't have been inclined to tell her about them.  So she'd fled east while the contrails arced overhead, buried herself in a service tunnel attached to an abandoned tidal bore drilled in from Penobscot Bay.  A few years ago the shamans had promised that bore would keep the lights on from Portland to Eastport, world without end.  But of course the world had ended, before the first turbine had even been installed.  Now the tunnel did nothing but shield burrowing mammals from the short-term consequences of their own stupidity.
Ten kilometers over buckled and debris-strewn roads that hadn't seen service since before ?ehemoth.  It was nothing short of a miracle that Taka had made it to safety before the missiles had hit.  Or it would have been, if the missiles had actually caused any of the devastation she was driving through now.
She was pretty sure they hadn't.  In fact, she was pretty sure they'd never even touched the ground.
The hill she was climbing crested a hundred meters ahead.  Fresh wreckage blocked her way halfway up that rise, the remains of some roadside building that had collapsed during the attack.  Now it was only a great tumbledown collection of smoking cinder blocks.  Not even Taka's eyeglasses could banish the shadows infesting that debris, all straight lines and sharp angles and dark empty parallelograms.
It was  too steep for Miri's limited ground-effectors.  Ouellette left the van to its own devices and climbed around the wreckage.  The bricks were still hot to the touch.  Heat from the scorched earth penetrated the soles of her boots, a subtle warmth, unpleasant only by implication.
On the uphill side of the debris she passed occasional objects which retained some crumbly semblance of human bones.  She was breathing the dead.  Perhaps some of those she inhaled would have died even earlier, if not for her efforts.  Perhaps some she'd helped today were still alive, in spite of everything.  She managed to take some faint comfort in that, until she crested the hill.
But no. 
The landscape spread out before her was as wasted as the path she'd just climbed:  flickering eruptions of white firelight punctuating a vista blackened as much by carbon as by nightfall.  The land had not been laid waste by missiles or microbes, not this time.  The thing that had done it was still visible in the distance:  a tiny dark oval in the sky, barely darker than the cloud bank behind it, hanging a few degrees over the horizon.  Taka almost missed it at first, even with the specs.  Its outline was fuzzy, sparkling with the faint visual static of errant photons unreasonably boosted.
But the gouts of flame that poured from its belly in the next instant showed up clearly enough even to naked eyes.
Not a missile.  Not a microbe.  A lifter, scouring the distance as it had already scoured the foreground.
And for all Taka Ouellette knew, she had been the one to bring it here.
Oh, it wasn't dead certain.  Wide-scale incendiary purges still happened under official pretext.  There'd actually been a time when they were pretty routine, back in the early panic-stricken days when people thought they might actually be able to contain ?ehemoth if they just had the balls to take drastic steps.  Those had scaled back when it had grown apparent that N'Am was blowing its whole napalm reserve to no good effect, but they still happened sometimes in some of the wilder zones out west.  It was even possible that such steps might have been undertaken without CSIRA bothering to extract their field personnel, although Taka doubted that even she would be left that far out of the loop. 
But not so far from here, not so long ago, she had let a monster escape into the real world.  Floods and firestorms always seemed to follow in the wake of such breaches, and Taka had almost forgotten a time when she believed in coincidence.
There'd be no shortage of proximate causes.  Perhaps some rogue autopilot afflicted with faulty programming, tricked by a typographic error into burning the wrong part of the world.  Or maybe a human pilot misled by garbled encryption, commands misheard through static and interference.  None of those details mattered.  Taka knew the bigger question:  who had tweaked any code that subverted the automatic pilot?  What had garbled instructions heard by the flesh and blood one?   
She knew the answer, too.  It would have been obvious to anyone who'd seen the monster in her eyephones, a few hours before.  There were no accidents.  Noise was never random.  And the machinery itself was malign.  
Here, staring out at a photoamplified crematorium stretching to the very horizon, it was the only explanation that made sense. 
You were a scientist once,  she told herself.  You rejected incantations outright.  You knew the truths that protected you from bias and woolly-mindedness, and you learned them all by heart:  correlation is not causation.  Nothing is real until replicated.  The mind sees order in noise; trust only numbers. 
Incantations of another sort, perhaps.  Not very effective ones; they hadn't, for all their familiarity, saved her from the creeping certainty that she'd called an evil spirit into her vehicle.  She could rationalize the superstitious awe in her head, justify it even.  Her training gave her more than enough tools for that.  Spirit was only a word, a convenient label for a virulent software entity forged in the fast-forward Darwinian landscape that had once been called Internet.  Taka knew how fast evolutionary changes could be wrought in a system where a hundred generations passed in the blink of an eye.  She remembered another time when electronic lifeforms—undesigned, unplanned, and unwanted—had grown so pestilential that the net itself had acquired the name Maelstrom.   The things called Lenies, or Shredders, or Madonnas—like the Gospel demons, their names were legion—they were simply exemplars of natural selection.  Extremely successful exemplars:  on the other side of the world, whole countries abased themselves in their names.  Or in the name of the icon on which they were based at least, some semi-mythical cult figure who'd risen to brief prominence on ?ehemoth's coattails. 
This was logic, not religion.  So what if these things had power beyond imagining, yet no physical substance?  So what if they lived in the wires and the wireless spaces between, and moved at the speed of their own electronic thoughts?  Demon, spirit—shorthand, not superstition.  Only metaphor, with more points of similarity than some.
And yet, now Taka Ouellette saw mysterious lights flashing in the sky, and found her lips moving in altogether the wrong kind of incantation.
Oh God, save us.
She turned and headed downhill.  She could probably get around the blockage, take some back road to continue on this way, but what was the point?  It was a question of cost-benefit analysis, of lives-saved-per-unit-effort.  That value would certainly be higher almost anywhere but here.
The collapsed building loomed ahead of her on the road again, gray and colorless in the amplified light.  The angular shadows looked different, more ominous from this angle.  They formed crude faces and body parts way past human scale, as if some giant cubist robot had collapsed in an angry heap and was summoning the strength to pull itself back together again.
As she began to pick her way around the pile, one of the shadows detached itself and moved to block her path.
"Holy—" Taka gasped.  It was only a woman, she saw now, and unarmed—these days you noticed such things almost instinctively—but her heart had been kicked instantly into fight/flight.  "Jesus, you scared me."
"Sorry.  Didn't mean to."  The woman took another step clear of the debris.  She was blonde, dressed entirely in some black skin-tight body stocking from neck to feet; only her hands and head were exposed, pale disembodied pieces against the contrasting darkness.  She was a few centimeters shorter than Taka herself.
There was something about her eyes, too.  They seemed too bright, somehow.  Probably an artefact of the specs, Taka decided.  Light reflecting off the wetness of the cornea, perhaps.
The woman jerked her chin back over her shoulder.  "That your ambulance?"
"Mobile Infirmary.  Yes."   Taka glanced around the full three-sixty.  She saw no one else.  "Are you sick?"
A laugh, very soft.  "Isn't everyone?"
"I mean—"
"No.  Not yet."
What is it about those eyes?  It was hard to tell from this distance—the woman was ten meters away—but it looked like she might be wearing nightshades.  In which case she could see Taka Ouellette way better than Taka Ouellette could see her through these fratzing photoamps.
People in the wildlands did not generally come so well-equipped.
Taka put her hands casually into her pockets; the act pushed her windbreaker away from the standard-issue Kimber on her hip.  "Are you hungry?" she asked.  "There's a cycler in the cab.  The bricks taste like shit, but if you're desperate..."
"Sorry about this," the woman said, stepping forward.  "Really."
Her eyes were like blank, translucent balls of ice.
Taka stepped back instinctively.  Something blocked her from behind.  She spun and stared into another pair of empty eyes, set in a face that seemed all scarred planes and chipped stone.  She didn't reach for her gun.  Somehow, he already had it.
"It's gene-locked," she said quickly.
"Mmm." He turned the weapon over in his hands.  He wore the look of a professional appraiser.  "We apologize for the intrusion," he told her, almost absently, "But we need you to disable the security on your vehicle."  He did not look at her.
"We're not going to hurt you," the woman said from behind.
Taka, unreassured, kept her eyes on the man holding her gun.
"Certainly not," he agreed, looking up at last.  "Not while there are more efficient alternatives."

#

Bagheera was one password.  There were several others.  Morris locked down the whole kit and kaboodle, so that not even Taka could start it up again without live authorization.  Pixel electrostabbed any passengers who didn't match her pheromone profile.   Tigger unlocked the doors and played dead until it heard Taka say Schroedinger:  then it locked down and pumped enough halothane into the cab to turn a 110-kg assailant into a sack of jelly for a minimum of fifteen minutes.  (Taka herself would be up and at 'em in a mere ninety seconds; when they'd given her the keys to Miri they'd also tweaked her blood with a resistant enzyme.)
Mobile Infirmaries were chock-full of resources and technology.  The wildlands were chock-full of desperate people literally dying for an edge, any edge.  Anti-theft measures made every kind of sense, and more than a little irony:  when it came right down to it, Miri was far better at killing and incapacitation than it was at healing the sick.
Now Taka stood beside the driver's door, white-eyed blackbodies on either side.  She ran through her options.
"Tigger," she said.  Miri chirped and unlocked the door.  
The woman pulled the door open and climbed into the cab.  Taka started to follow.  A hand clapped down on her shoulder.
Taka turned and faced her captor.  "It's gene-locked, too.  I'll have to reset it if you want to drive."
"We don't," he told her.  "Not yet."
"The board's dark," the woman said from behind the wheel.
The hand on her shoulder tightened subtly, pressed forward.  Taka felt herself guided to the cab;  the other woman slid over into the passenger seat to give her room.
"Actually," the man said, "I think we'll let the doctor here take the passenger seat."  The hand pressed down.  Taka ducked in through the driver's side, slid between the seat and the steering stick as the other woman left the cab through the passenger door.  The woman grasped the edge of that door and started to push it shut.
"No," said the man, very distinctly.  The woman froze.
He was behind the wheel now; his hand hadn't come off Taka's shoulder for an instant.  "One of us stays outside the cab at all times," he told his partner.  "And we leave both doors open."
His partner nodded.  He took his hand off Taka's shoulder and looked at the dark, unhelpful face of the dash.
"Bring it online," he said.  "Touch only, no voice control.  Do not start the engine."
Taka stared back at him, unmoving.
The blond leaned in over her shoulder.  "We weren't bullshitting you," she said quietly.  "We really don't want to hurt you, unless there's no choice.  I'm betting that's a pretty charitable attitude for these parts, so why are you pushing it?"
These parts.  So they were new in town.  Not that this came as any great surprise; these two were the furthest thing from wildland refugees that Taka had seen in ages.
She shook her head.  "You're stealing an MI.  That's going to hurt a lot more people than me."
"If you cooperate you can have it back in a little while," the man told her.  "Bring it online."
She keyed the genepad.  The dashboard lit up. 
He studied the display.  "So I take it you're some sort of itinerant health-care worker."  
"Some sort," Taka said carefully.
"Where are you out of?" he asked.
"Out of?"
"Who sets your route?  Who resupplies you?"
"Bangor, usually."
"They airlift supplies to you in the field?"
"When they can spare them."
He grunted.  "Your inventory beacon's disabled." 
He spoke as if it were a surprise.  
"I just radio in when my stocks get too low," Taka told him.  "Why would—what are you doing!"
He paused, fingers poised over the GPS menu he'd just brought up.  "I'm fixing some locations," he said mildly.  "Is there a problem?"
"Are you crazy?  It's still practically line-of-sight!  Do you want it to come back?"
"Want what to come back?" the woman asked.
"What do you think did all this?"
They eyed her expressionlessly.   "CSIRA, I expect," the man said after a moment.  "This was a containment burn, wasn't it?"
"It was a Lenie!" Taka shouted.  Oh Jesus what if he brings it back, what if he—
Something pulled her around from behind. Glacial eyes bored directly into hers.  She could feel the woman's breath against her cheek. 
"What did you just say?"
Taka swallowed and held herself in check.  The panic receded slightly.
"Listen to me," she said.  "It got in through my GPS last time.  I don't know how, but if you go online you could bring it back.  Right now I wouldn't even risk radio."
"This thing—" the man began.
"How can you not know about them?" Taka cried, exasperated
The two exchanged some indecipherable glance across her.
"We know," the man said.  Taka noted gratefully that he'd shut down GPS.  "Are you saying it was responsible for yesterday's missile attack?"
"No, of course n—"  Taka stopped.  She'd never considered that before.
"I never thought so," she said after a moment.  "Anything's possible, I guess.  Some people say the M&M's recruited them somehow."
"Who else would have done it?" the woman wondered.
"Eurasia.  Africa.  Anyone, really."  A sudden thought struck her:  "You aren't from—?"
The man shook his head.  "No."
She couldn't really blame the missile-throwers, whoever they were.  According to the dispatches ?ehemoth still hadn't conquered the lands beyond Atlantic; those people probably still thought they could contain it if they just sterilized the hot zone.  A phrase tickled the back of Taka's mind, some worn-out slogan once used to justify astronomical death tolls.  That was it:  The Greater Good.  "Anyway," she went on, "the missiles never made it through.  That's not what all this is."
The woman stared out the window, where all this was lightening to smoky, pre-dawn gray.  "What stopped them?"
Taka shrugged.  "N'Am defense shield."
"How could you tell?" asked the man.
"You can see the re-entry trails when the antis come down from orbit.  You can see them dim down before they blow up.  Smokey starbursts, like fireworks almost."
The woman glanced around.  "So all this, this was your—your Lenie?"
A snippet from a very old song floated through Taka's mind.  There are no accidents 'round here...
"You said starbursts?" the man said.  
Taka nodded.
"And the contrails dimmed down before detonation."
"So?"
"Which contrails?  The incoming missiles or the N'Am antis?"
"How should I know?"
"You saw this last night?"
Taka nodded.
"What time?"
"I don't know.  Listen, I had other things on my mind, I—"
I'd just watched a few dozen people sliced into cold cuts because I might have left a circuit open somewhere...
The man was watching her with a sudden unwavering intensity.  His eyes were blank but far from empty.
  She tried to remember.  "It was dusk, the sun had been down for—I don't know, maybe fifteen or twenty minutes?"
"Is that typical of these attacks?  Sunset?"
"I never thought about it before," Taka admitted.  "I guess so.  Or nighttime, at least."
"Was there ever an attack that occurred during broad daylight?"
She thought hard.  "I...I can't remember any."
"How long after the contrails dimmed did the starbursts appear?"
"Look, I didn't—"
"How long?"
"I don't know, okay?  Maybe around five seconds or so."
"How many degrees of arc did the contrails—"
"Mister, I don't even know what that means."
The white-eyed man said nothing for what seemed like a very long time.  He did not move.  Taka got the sense of wheels in motion.
Finally:  "That tunnel you hid in."
"How did—you followed me?  All the way from there?  On foot?"
"It wasn't far," the woman told her.  "Less than a kilometer."
Taka shook her head, amazed.  At the time, inching through gusts of scorched earth, it seemed as if she'd been in motion for days.
"You stopped at the gate.  To cut the chain."
Taka nodded.  In hindsight it seemed absurd—the MI could have crashed that barrier in an instant, and the sky was falling.
"You looked up at the sky," he surmised.
"Yes."
"What did you see?"
"I told you.  Contrails.  Starbursts."
"Where was the closest starburst?"
"I don't—"
"Get out of the cab."
She stared at him.
"Go on," he said.
She climbed out into gray dawn.  There were no more spirits inhabiting the shattered building before her:  the rising light stripped away the Rorschach shadows, leaving nothing but a haphazard pile of cinderblocks and I-beams.   The few scorched trees still standing nearby, burned past black to ash white, flanked the road like upthrust skeletal hands.
He was at her side.  "Close your eyes."
She did.  If he was going to kill her, there wasn't much she could do about it even with her eyes open.
"You're at the gate."  His voice was steady, soothing.  "You're facing the gate.  You turn around and look back up the road.  You look up at the sky.   Go on."
She turned, eyes still closed, memory filling the gaps.  She craned her neck.
"You see starbursts," the voice continued.  "I want you to point at the one that's most directly overhead.  The one that's closest to the gate.  Remember where it was in the sky, and point."
She raised her arm and held it steady.
"What's the deal, Ken?" the woman asked in the void. "Shouldn't we be—"
"You can open your eyes now," said the m—said Ken.  So she did.
She didn't know who these people were, but she was coming to believe at least one thing they'd told her:  they didn't want to hurt her.
Not while there are more efficient alternatives.
She allowed herself a trickle of relief.  "Any more questions?"
"One more.  Got any path grenades?"
"Loads."
"Do any of them key on bugs that aren't ?ehemoth?"
"Most of them."  Taka shrugged.  "?ehemoth tracers are kind of redundant hereabouts."
She dug out the grenades he wanted, and a pistol to fire them.  He checked them over with the same eye he'd used on her Kimber.  Evidently they passed inspection.  "I shouldn't be more than a few hours," he told his partner.  He glanced at the MI.  "Don't let her start the engine or close the doors, whether she's inside or out."
The woman looked at Taka, her expression unreadable.
"Hey," Taka said.  "I—"
Ken shook his head.  "Don't worry about it.  We'll sort it out when I get back."
He started off down the road.  He didn't look back.
Taka took a deep breath and studied the other woman.  "So you're guarding me, now?"
The corner of the woman's mouth twitched.
Damn, but those eyes are strange.  Can't see anything in there.
She tried again.  "Ken seems like a nice enough guy."
The other woman stared a cold eyeless stare for an instant, and burst out laughing.
It seemed like a good sign.  "So are you two an item, or what?"
The woman shook her head, still smiling.  "What."
"Not that you asked, but my name's Taka Ouellette."
Just like that, the smile disappeared.
Oh look Dave, I fouled up again.  I always have to go that one step too far...
But the other woman's mouth was moving.  " Le—Laurie," it said.
"Ah."  Taka tried to think of something else to say.  "Not exactly pleased to meet you," she said at last, trying to keep her tone light.
"Yeah," Laurie said.  "I get that a lot."
THE TRIGONOMETRY OF SALVATION
This does not parse, Lubin thought.  
Mid-June on the forty-fourth parallel.  Fifteen or twenty minutes after sunset—say, about five degrees of planetary rotation.  Which would put eclipse altitude at about thirty-three kilometers.  The missiles had dropped into shadow four or five seconds before detonation, if this witness was to be trusted.  Assuming the usual reentry velocity of seven kilometers per second, that put actual detonation at an altitude no greater than five thousand meters, probably much lower.
She'd reported an airburst.  Not an impact, and not a fireball.  Fireworks, she'd called them.  And always at twilight, or during darkness.
The sun was just clearing the ridge to the east when he arrived at the back door of Penobscot Power's abandoned enterprise.   Phocoena and the doctor's MI had coexisted briefly in the bowels of those remains; her service tunnel had run along the spine of a great subterranean finger of ocean, sixty meters wide and a hundred times as long, drilled through solid bedrock.  At the time of its conception it had been a valiant recreation of the lunar engine that drove the tides of Fundy, two hundred klicks up the coast.   Now it was only a great flooded sewer pipe, and a way for shy submarines to slip inland unobserved.
None of which was obvious from here, of course.  From here, there was only a scorched chain-link fence, carbon-coated rectangles of metal that had once proclaimed No Trespassing, and—fifty meters on the other side, where the rock rose from the earth—a broken-toothed concrete-and-rebar mouth in the face of the ridge.  One of the gate's two panels swung creaking in the arid breeze.  The other listed at an angle, stiff in its hinges.
He stood with his back to the gate.  He raised his arm and held it.  He remembered where the doctor had pointed, corrected his angle.
That way.
Just a few degrees over the horizon.  That implied either a distant sighting or a much closer, low-altitude one.  Atmospheric inversions were strongest during twilight and darkness, Lubin remembered.  They were generally only a few hundred meters thick, and they tended to act as a blanket, holding released particulates close to the ground.
He walked south.  Flame still flickered here and there, consuming little pockets of left-over combustibles.  A morning breeze was rising, coming in from the coast.  It promised cooler temperatures and cleaner air;  now, though, ash still gusted everywhere.  Lubin coughed up chalky phlegm and kept going.  
The doctor had given him a belt to go with the grenades.  The little aerosol explosives bumped against his hips as he walked.  He kept the gun in hand, aiming absently at convenient targets, stumps and powdered shrubs and the remains of fenceposts.  There wasn't much left to point at.  His imagination invested what there was with limbs and faces.  He imagined them bleeding.

#

Of course, his witness had hardly been a GPS on legs.  There were so many errors nested in her directions that correcting for wind speed was tantamount to adding one small error to a half-dozen larger ones.  Still, Lubin was nothing if not systematic.  There was a reasonable chance that he was within a kilometer of the starburst's coordinates.  He turned east for a few minutes, to compensate for the breeze.  Then he popped the first grenade onto his pistol and fired at the sky.
It soared into the air like a great yellow egg and exploded into a fluorescent pink cloud twenty meters across.
He watched it dissipate.  The first tatters followed the prevailing winds, tugging the cloud into an ovoid, delicate cotton-candy streamers drifting from its downstream end.  After a few moments, though, it began to disperse laterally as well, its component particles instinctively sniffing the air for signs of treasure.
No obvious movement against the wind.  That would have been too much to hope for, this early in the game.
He fired the next grenade a hundred meters diagonally upwind of the first; the third, a hundred meters from each of the others, the closing point of a roughly equilateral triangle.  He zigzagged his way across the wasted landscape, kicking little drifts of ash where bracken and shrubbery had clustered a day earlier, navigating endless rocky moguls and fissures.  Once he even hopped across a scorched streambed, still trickling, fed by some miraculous source further upstream than the flamethrowers had reached.  At rough, regular intervals he shot another absurd pink cloud into the sky, and watched it spread, and moved on.
He was aiming his eighth grenade when he noticed the residue of the seventh behaving strangely.  It had started as puffy round cumulus, like all the others.  Now, though, it was streaked and streaming, as though being stretched by the wind.  Which would indeed have been the case,  if it had been streaming with the breeze instead of across it.
And another cloud, more distant and dissipated, seemed to be breaking the same rules.  They didn't flow, these aerosol streams, not to the naked eye.  Rather, they seemed to drift against the wind, towards some point of convergence back the way Lubin had come, about thirty degrees off his own track.
And they were losing altitude.
He started after them.  The motes in those clouds couldn't be called intelligent by any stretch of the word, but they knew what they liked and they had the means to get to it.  They were olfactory creatures, and they loved the smell of two things above all else.  The first was the protein signatures put out by a wide array of weaponised biosols; they tracked that aroma like sharks sniffing blood in the water, and when they finally found that ambrosia and rolled around in it they changed, chemically.  That was the other thing these creatures loved:  the smell of their own kind, fulfilled.
It was the classic biomagnifying one-two punch.  Too often, traces of one's quarry were too faint to do more than whisper to a few passing motes.  Those would lock on, enzyme-to-substrate, and achieve their own personal nirvana — but that very merger would quench the emissions that had lured them in the first place.  The contaminant would be flagged, but the flag would be far to small to catch any mammalian eye.
But to be aroused not only by prey, but by others similarly aroused—why, it scarcely mattered whether there was enough to go around.  A single offending particle would be enough to start an orgiastic fission reaction.  Each subsequent arrival would only brighten the collective signal.
Lubin found it half-buried in the gravel bed of a shallow gully.  It looked like a snub-nosed bullet thirty centimeters long, perforated by rows of circular holes along half its length.  It looked like the salt shaker of a giant with pathologically high blood pressure.  It looked like the business end of a multiheaded suborbital device for the delivery of biological aerosols.
Lubin couldn't tell what color it had originally been.  It was dripping with fluorescent pink goo.

#

Ouellete's MI changed before his eyes on the final steps of his approach.  Bright holographic phantoms resolved within the vehicle—the plastic skin grew translucent, exposing neon guts and nerves beneath.  Lubin was still getting used to such visions.  His new inlays served up the diagnostic emissions of any unshielded machinery within a twelve meter radius.  This particular vehicle wasn't quite as forthcoming as he would have liked, though.  It was riddled with tumors:  rectangular shadows beneath the dash, dark swathes across the passenger door, a black unreflective cylinder rising through the center of the vehicle like a dark heart.  The MI had a lot of security, all of it shielded.
Clarke and Ouellette stood to one side, watching him approach.  Ouellette was nothing special to Lubin's new eyes.  Dim sparkles glimmered from within Clarke's thorax, but they told him nothing; inlays and implants spoke different dialects.
He toggled the inlays; the hallucinatory schematics imploded, leaving dull plastic and white dust and nonluminous flesh and clothing behind.
"You found something," Ouellette said.  "We saw the clouds."
He told them.  Ouellette stared:  "They're shooting germs at us?  We're already on our last legs!  Why bother hitting us with Megapox or Supercol when we're already—"
Clarke looked the question over the doctor's confusion:  ?-max?  Lubin shrugged.  
"I mean, unless..."  Ouellette fell silent.
"Perhaps N'Am isn't dying fast enough," Lubin remarked.  "A significant number of M&Ms regard ?ehemoth as divine retribution for North America's sins.  It's official policy in Italy and Libya, at least.  Botswana too, I believe."
Clarke snorted.  "North America's sins?  They think it just stops at the Atlantic?"
"The moderates think they can keep it at bay," Ouellette said.  "The extremists don't want to.  They don't get into heaven until the world ends."  Her mind seemed elsewhere; she spoke as if absently flicking at some hovering insect.
Lubin let her think.  She was, after all, the closest available approximation to a native guide.  Perhaps she could come up with something.
Although her odds might be better if I told her about ?-max, he reflected.
"Who are you people?" Ouellette asked quietly.
"Excuse me?"
"You're not feral.  You're not clave.  You sure as hell aren't CSIRA or you'd be better equipped.  Maybe you're TransAt—but that doesn't fit either."  A faint smile passed across her face.  "You don't know what you're doing, do you?  You're making it up as you go along..."
Lubin kept his face neutral and his question on target.  "Is there any reason not to believe that people might launch a biological attack against North America simply to—hasten things along?"
She seemed to find this amusing.  "You don't get out much, do you?"
"Am I wrong?"
"You're not wrong."  Ouellette spat on the ashy ground.  "Lots of folks might help Providence along, if they had the chance.  That's not what this is."
"Then what is it?"
"I think it's a counteragent."
Clarke looked up at that.  "A cure?"
"Not so personal, maybe.  Something that kills ?ehemoth in the wild."
Lubin eyed Ouellette.  She eyed him back, and answered his unspoken skepticism:  "Of course there are crazies out there who want the world to end.  But there have to be a lot more people who don't, wouldn't you agree?  And they'd be working just as hard."
There was something in her eyes that hadn't been there before.  They almost shone.
He nodded.  "But if this is a counteragent, why do you suppose they tried to shoot it down?  And why deliver it suborbitally?  Wouldn't it be more efficient to leave deployment to the local authorities?"
Ouellette rolled her eyes.  "What local authorities?"
Clarke frowned.  "Wouldn't someone have told—everybody?  Wouldn't someone have told you?"
"Laurie, you make something like this too public and you're painting a bullseye on your chest for the M&Ms.  As for missile defense—" Ouellette turned back to Lubin— "Did the people on your planet ever mention something called the Rio Insurrection?"
"Tell us about it," Lubin said.  Thinking:  Laurie?
"I can't, really," Ouellette admitted.  "Nobody really knows what happened.  They say maybe a bunch of Madonnas got into CSIRA's Rio de Janeiro offices and went crazy.  Launched attacks all over the place."
"Who won?"
"The good guys.  At least, Rio got vaporized and the trouble stopped, but who knows?  Some people say that it wasn't Lenies at all, it was some kind of civil war between rogue 'lawbreakers.  But whatever it was, it was—way out there."  She waved a hand at the horizon.  "We had our own problems to deal with.  And the only real moral of the story is, nobody knows who's running things any more, or whose side they're on, and we're all too busy hanging on by our fingernails to afford the time for any Big Questions.  For all we know N'Am's battellites are running on autopilot, and ground control just lost the access codes.  Or the Lenies are catching up on target practice.  Or—or maybe the M&Ms have someone on the inside.  The fact that something's shooting at these bugs doesn't prove anything, one way or another."
Lubin focused on that.  "No proof."
"So I'm going to get some.  I'm going to sequence the bug.  Now are you going to let me drive back to the scene, or am I going to have to walk?"
Lubin said nothing.  From the corner of his eye, he saw Clarke open her mouth and close it again.
"Fine."  Ouellette proceeded to the back of her van and opened the access panel.  Lubin let her extract a steriwrap cartridge and a collapsible stretcher with ground-effector coils built into the frame.  She looked at him calmly:  "It'll fit on this?"
He nodded.
Clarke held the folded device against Ouellette's back while the doctor cinched the shoulder straps.  Ouellette nodded cursory thanks and started down the road, not looking back.
"You think she's wrong,"  Clarke said as the other woman dwindled, shimmering in the rising heat.
"I don't know."
"What if she isn't?"
"It doesn't matter."
"It doesn't matter."  Clarke shook her head, almost amused.  "Ken, are you crazy?"
Lubin shrugged.  "If she can get a usable sample, we'll know whether it's ?-max.  Either way, we can drive to Bangor and use her credentials to get inside.  After that it should be—"
"Ken, did you even hear what she just said?  There could be fix.  For ?ehemoth."
He sighed.
"This is exactly why I didn't want you coming," he said at last. "You've got your own agenda, and it's not what we're here for.  You get distracted."
"Distracted?"  She shook her head, astonished.  "I'm talking about saving the world, Ken.  I don't think I'm distracted at all."
"No you don't.  You think you're damned."
Instantly, something in her shut down.
He pushed on anyway.  "I don't agree, for what it's worth."
"Really."  Clarke's face was an expressionless mask.
"I'd say you're only obsessed.  Which is still problematic."
Her jaw tightened the merest fraction.  "Go on."
"You think you destroyed the world."  Lubin looked around at the scorched landscape.  "You think this is all your fault.  You'd give up the mission, your life, mine.  In an instant.  Just so long as you saw the slightest chance of salvation.  You're so sick of the blood on your hands you'd barely notice if you had to wash it off with even more."
"Is that what you think."  Her voice was stone.
He looked at her.  "Is there anything you wouldn't do, then?  For the chance to take it all back?"
She held his gaze for long seconds.  Finally she looked away.
Lubin nodded.  "You've personalized the Greater Good in a way I've never seen in a baseline human before.  I wonder if your brain hasn't concocted its own form of Guilt Trip."
She stared at the ground.  "It doesn't change anything," she whispered at last.  "Even if my motives are—personal..."
"It's not your motives that worry me.  It's your judgment."
"We're still talking about saving the world."
"No," he said.  "We're talking about someone else, trying to—possibly.  We're talking about an entire country or consortium, far better-equipped and better-informed than two hitchhikers from the Mid Atlantic Ridge.  And—" holding up his hand against her protest—"we are also talking about other powerful forces who may be trying to stop them, for reasons we can only guess at.  Or perhaps for no reason at all, if Ouellette's speculations are correct.  We're not players in this, no matter how desperately you wish we were."
"We've always been players, Ken.  We've just been too scared to make a move for the past five years."
"And things have changed during that time."
She shook her head.  "We have to try."
"We don't even know the rules any more.  And what about the things we can change?  What about Atlantis?  What about the rifters?  What about Alyx?  Do you really want to throw away any chance of helping them in favor of a lost cause?"
He knew the instant he said it that he'd miscalculated.  Something flared in her, something icy and familiar and utterly unswayable.  "How dare you," she hissed.  "You never gave a shit about Alyx or Grace or—or even me, for that matter.  You were ready to kill us all,  you switched sides every time the odds changed."  Clarke shook her head in disgust.  "How dare you talk about loyalty and saving lives.  You don't even know what that means unless someone feeds it to you as a mission parameter."
He should have known it would be no use arguing with her.  She wasn't interested in assessing the odds of success.  She wasn't even balancing payoffs, weighing Atlantis against the rest of the world.  The only variables she cared about came from inside her own head, and neither guilt nor obsession were amenable to cost-benefit analysis.
Even so, her words provoked a strange feeling in his throat.
"Lenie, I didn't mean—"
She held up her hand and refused to meet his eyes.  He waited.
"Maybe it's not even your fault,"  she said after a while.  "They just built you that way."
He allowed himself the curiosity.  "What way?"
"You're an army ant.  You just bull ahead with your feelers on the ground, following your orders and your mission profiles and your short-term objectives, and it never even occurs to you to look up and see the big picture."
"I see it," Lubin admitted softly.  "It's very much bigger than you seem willing to admit."
She shook her head, still not looking at him.
He tried again.  "Very well.  You know the big picture:  what do you suggest we do with that information?  Can you offer anything beyond wishful thinking?  Do you have any kind of strategy for saving the world, as you put it?"
"I do," said Taka Ouellette.
They turned.  She stood back beside the MI, arms folded.  She'd obviously ditched the stretcher and circled back while they weren't looking.  
Lubin blinked in astonishment.  "Your sample—"
"From that warhead you found?  Not a chance.  The tracers would've metabolized any active agent down to the atoms."
Clarke shot him a look, clear as binary even though the frosting on her eyes:   Not quite on your game, superspy? Letting some dick-ass country doctor sneak up on you?  
"But I know how we can get a sample,"  Ouellette continued, looking straight at Clarke.  "And I could use your help."
MIGRATION
Obviously she had come late to the conversation.  If she had heard the way it started, Clarke knew, Taka Ouellette wouldn't have wanted anything to do to her.
The good doctor had contacts on the ground, so she said.  People she'd saved, or bought time for.  The loved ones of those whose suffering she'd ended.  Occasional dealers, wildland hustlers who could sometimes conjure up drugs or spare parts to be weighed against other items in trade.  They were the furthest thing from altruists, but they could be life-savers when the closest resupply lifter was a week away.
All of them had a healthy sense of self-interest.  All of them knew others.
Lubin remained skeptical, of course.  Or at least, Clarke thought, he continued to act skeptical.  It was part of his schtick.  It had to be.  Nobody would honestly turn their back on the chance, however faint, to undo even a part of what—
—what I set in motion...
There was the rub, and Lubin—God damn him—knew it as well as she did.  Once you've helped destroy the world, once you've taken fierce stinging pleasure in its death throes, it's not easy to claim the moral high ground over someone who's merely reluctant to save it.  Even if it's been a while.  Even if you've changed in the meantime.  If there's a Statute of Limitations on terracide, there's no way it expires after a lousy five years.
Taka Ouellette had proposed a southern course towards whatever was left of Portland;  and even if there was no way into the datapipe from there, Boston would be that much closer.  Besides, Ouellette was an official person in these parts, someone with recognized credentials and identity.  Almost an authority figure, by local standards.  She might even be able to walk them in through the front door. 
"Authority figures don't drive around handing out derms from the back of a truck," Lubin said. 
"Yeah?  And what have your efforts netted us lately?  You still think you can hack into the global nervous system when all the back-door nerves have been burned away?"
In the end he agreed, with conditions.  They would go along with Ouellette's plan as long as it took them in the right direction.  They would make use of her MI after every counterintrusion device had been ripped out of the cab; he would ensure her cooperation while she advised Clarke on the necessary monkeywork. 
The MI's cab was a marvel of spatial economy.  Twin cots folded down in the space behind the seats, and a little shower/head cubicle squeezed into the rear wall between a Calvin cycler and the forward medical interface.  But what really amazed Clarke was the number of booby traps infesting the place.  There were gas canisters hooked into the ventilation system.  There were taser needles sheathed in the seat cushions, ready to shoot through flesh and insulative clothing at a word or a touch.  There was a photic driver under the dash, a directional infrared strobe that could penetrate closed eyelids and induce seizures.  Taka Ouellette itemized them all, Lubin standing at her back, while Clarke scrambled about with a toolkit and pulled the plugs.  Clarke had no way of knowing if the list was comprehensive—for all she knew, Ouellette was leaving an ace up her sleeve against future necessity—but Lubin was a lot less trusting than she was, and Lubin seemed satisfied.
It took them an hour to disarm the cab.  After Ouellette asked if they wanted to disable external security as well, she actually seemed disappointed when Lubin shook his head.
They split up.  Lubin would pilot Phocoena down the coast and try to access Portland independently; Clarke, keeping a copy of the ?-max sequence close to her chest, would accompany Ouellette towards a rendezvous near one of her regular waypoints.
"Don't tell her about ?-max before you have to," Lubin warned, safely out of Ouellete's earshot.
"Why not?"
"Because it defeats the only defense anyone's ever been able to muster against ?ehemoth.  The moment she realizes something like that exists, her priorities are going to turn upside down."
Clarke was initially surprised that Lubin would let either of them out of his sight; he wasn't fond of potential security breaches even without his kill reflex engaged, and he knew Clarke was chafing against his mission priorities.  He wasn't a trusting soul at the best of times; how did he know that the two women wouldn't simply turn inland and abandon him altogether?
It was only when they'd gone their separate ways that the obvious answer occurred to her.  Of course, he'd been hoping for that very thing.

#

They drove through a land blasted and scoured clean of any live thing.  The MI, built for rough terrain, climbed over fallen tree trunks that crumbled beneath its wheels.  It navigated potholes filled with ash and soot, drove straightaways where swirls and gusts of gray powder swept across the refrozen asphalt like tiny Antarctic blizzards, centimeters high.  Twice they passed deranged billboards half-melted against the rock, their lattices warped and defiantly semifunctional, advertising nothing now but the flickering multicolored contours of their own heat stress.
After a while it began to rain.  The ash congealed like paste on the ground, stuck to the hood like blobs of papier maché.  Some of those blobs were almost heavy enough to thwart the windshield, leaving light smudges on the glass before the static field bounced them away.
They didn't exchange a word during that whole time.  Unfamiliar music filled the silence between them, archaic compositions full of clonking pianos and nervous strings.  Ouellette seemed to like the stuff, anyway.  She focused on driving while Clarke stared out the window, reflecting on the allocation of damage.  How much of this devastation could be laid at her door?  How much at the doors of demons who'd adopted her name?
Eventually they left the scorched zone behind.  Now there was real grass at the side of the road, occasional shrubs pocking the ditches further back, real evergreens looming like ranks of ragged, starving stickmen on the other side.  Mostly brown, of course, or turning brown, as though in the grip of a great endless drought.  
This rain wouldn't help them.  They were hanging on—some even flew flags of hardy, defiant green from their limbs—but ?ehemoth was everywhere, and it was implacable, and it had all the time in the world.  Sometimes it massed so abundantly that it was visible to the naked eye: patches of ochre mould smothering the grass, or spreading across the trunks of trees.   And yet, the sight of all this vegetation—not truly alive, perhaps, but at least physically intact—seemed cause for some small celebration after the charnel house they'd just escaped.   
"So, do you ever take those out?" Ouellette wondered.
"Sorry?"  Clarke brought her mind back to the moment.  The doctor had gone to autopilot—a simple follow-the-road mode, with no dangerous navigational forays into GPS.
"Those caps on your eyes.  Do you ever...?"
"Oh.  No.  Not usually."
"Nightshades?  Let you see in the dark?"
"Sort of."
Ouellette pursed her lips.  "I remember seeing those, years ago.  All over the place, just before everything went bad.  They were really popular for about twenty minutes."
"They still are, where I come from."  Clarke looked out the rain-spattered side window.  "With my tribe, anyway."
"Tribe?  You're not all the way from Africa?"
Clarke snorted softly.  "Fuck no."  Only about half the way, actually...
"Didn't think so.  You don't have the melanin, not that that means much these days of course.  And Afros wouldn't be over here anyway, except maybe to gloat."
"Gloat?"
"Not that you can blame them, mind you.  There's barely anyone left over there more than forty years old.  Firewitch is pure poetic justice as far as they're concerned."
Clarke shrugged.
"So if not Africa," Ouellette said, pushing it, "Maybe you're from Mars."
"Why would you say that?"
"You're definitely not from around here.  You thought Miri was an ambulance."  She patted the dashboard affectionately.  "You don't know about the Lenies—"
Clarke clenched her teeth, suddenly angry.  "I know about them.  Nasty evolving code that lives in the Maelstrom and raises shit.  Vengeance icon for a bunch of countries that hate your guts.  And while we're on the subject, maybe you could explain how you came to be blundering around handing out derms and mercy-kills while the whole eastern hemisphere is trying to lob a cure for ?ehemoth onto your head?  Not being from Mars doesn't seem to have kept you all that up-to-speed on current events."
Ouellette watched her curiously for a moment.  "There you go again."
"What?"
"Maelstrom.  It's been years since I heard anyone use that word."
"So what?  What difference does it make?"
"Come on, Laurie.  You show up in the middle of nowhere, you hijack my van, neither of you is normal by any stretch of the imagination—I mean, of course I want to know where you came from."
Clarke's anger faded as suddenly as it had flared.  "Sorry."
"In fact, given that I still seem to be some kind of honorary prisoner, you could even say you owe me an explanation."
"We were hiding," Clarke blurted out.
"Hiding."  Ouellette didn't seem surprised.  "Where is there to hide?"
"Nowhere, as it turns out.  That's why we came back."
"Are you a corpse?" Ouellette asked.
"Do I look like one?"
"You look like some kind of deep-sea diver."  She gestured at the vent on Clarke's chest.  "Electrolysis intake, right?"
Clarke nodded.
"So I guess you've been underwater all this time.  Huh."  Ouellette shook her head.  "I'd have guessed geosynch, myself."
"Why?"
"It was just one of the rumors going around.  Back when the witch was just getting started, and the riots were taking off—this thread started growing, that a few hundred high-powered corpses had vanished off the face of the earth.  I don't know how you'd ever prove something like that, nobody ever saw those people in the flesh anyway.  They could've all been sims for all we knew.  Anyway, you know how these things get around.  The word was they'd all jumped offworld from Australia, and they were all nice and comfy up in geosynch watching the world come down." 
"I'm not a corpse," Clarke said.
"But you work for them,"  Ouellette guessed.
"Who didn't?"
"I mean recently."
"Recently?"  Clarke shook her head.  "I think I can honestly say that neither Ken nor I—Christ!"
It jumped out from some hiding place under the dash, all segments and clicking mandibles.  It clung to her knee with far too many jointed limbs, a grotesque hybrid of grasshopper and centipede the size of her little finger.  Her hand came down of its own accord; the little creature splattered under her palm.
"Fuck," she breathed.  "What was that?"
"Whatever it was, it wasn't doing you any harm."
"I've never seen anything like—"  Clarke broke off, looked at the other woman.  Ouellette actually looked pissed.
"That wasn't—that wasn't a pet or anything, was it?"  It seemed absurd.  Then again, it wouldn't be any crazier than keeping a head cheese.
I wonder how she's doing... 
"It was just a bug," Ouellette said.  "It wasn't hurting anybody."
Clarke wiped her palm against her thigh; chitin and yellow goop smeared across the diveskin.  "That just—that was wrong.  That wasn't like any bug I've ever seen."
"I keep telling you.  You're behind the times."
"So these things are old news?"
Ouellette shrugged, her irritation apparently subsiding.  "They're starting to show up here and there.  Basically, regular bugs with too many segments.  Some kind of Hox mutation, I'd guess, but I don't know if anybody's looked at them all that closely."
Clarke looked at the sodden, withering landscape scrolling past the window.  "You seem pretty invested in a—a bug."
"What, things aren't dying fast enough for you?  You have to help them along?"  Ouellette took a breath, started over.  "Sorry.  You're right.  I just—you kind of empathize with things after a while, you know?  Spend enough time out here, everything seems—valuable..."
Clarke didn't answer.  The vehicle navigated a fissure in the road, wobbling on its ground-effect shocks.
"I know it doesn't make much sense," Ouellette admitted after a while.  "It's not like ?ehemoth changed much of anything."
"What?  Look out the window, Tak.  Everything's dying." 
"That was happening anyway.  Not as fast, maybe."
"Huh."  Clarke regarded the other woman.  "And you really think someone's throwing a cure over the transom."
"For Human stupidity?  No such thing, I suspect.  But for ?ehemoth, who knows?"
"How would that work?  I mean, what haven't they already tried?"
Ouellette shook her head, laughing softly.  "Laurie, you give me way too much credit.  I don't have a clue."  She thought a moment.  "Could be a Silverback Solution, I suppose."
"Never heard of it."
"Few decades ago, in Africa.  Hardly any gorillas left, and the natives were eating up the few that remained.  So some conservation group got the bright idea of making the gorillas inedible."
"Yeah?  How?"
"Engineered Ebola variant.  Didn't harm the gorillas, but any human who ate one would bleed out inside seventy-two hours."
Clarke smiled, faintly impressed.  "Would that work for us?" 
"It'd be tough.  Germs evolve countermeasures a lot faster than mammals."
"I guess it didn’t work for the gorillas either.”
Ouellette snorted.  "It worked way too well."
"So how come they’re extinct?"
"We wiped them out.  Unacceptable risk to Human health."
Rain pelted against the roof of the cab and streaked along the side windows.  Up front, the drops hurtled at the windshield and veered impossibly off-target, centimeters from impact.
"Taka," Clarke said after a few minutes.
Ouellette looked at her.
"Why don't people call it Maelstrom any more?"
The doctor smiled faintly.  "You do know why they called it that in the first place, right?"
"It got...crowded.  User storms, e-life."
Ouellette nodded.  "Most of that's gone now.  So much of the actual network has degraded, physically, that most of the wildlife went extinct from habitat loss.  This side of the wall, anyway—they partitioned N'amNet off years ago.  For all I know it's still boiling along everywhere else, but around here—"
She looked out the window.
"Here, the Maelstrom just moved outside."
KARMA
Achilles Desjardins woke to the sound of a scream.
It had died by the time he was fully awake.  He lay in the darkness and wondered for a moment if he had dreamt it; there had been a time, not so long ago, when his sleep had been filled with screams.  He wondered if perhaps the scream had been his, if he had awakened himself—but again, that hadn't happened in years.  Not since he'd become a new man.
Or rather, not since Alice had let the old one out of the cellar.
Awake, alert, he knew the truth.  The scream had not risen from his mind or his throat; it had risen from machinery.  An alarm, raised in one instant and cut off the next.
Odd.
He brought up his inlays.  Outside his skull, the darkness persisted; inside, a half-dozen bright windows opened in his occipital cortex.  He scrolled through the major feeds, then the minor ones; he sought threats from the other side of the world, from orbit, from any foolhardy civilian who might have blundered against the fence that guarded his perimeter.  He checked the impoverished cluster of rooms and hallways that his skeletal day staff had access to, although it was barely 0400 and none of them would be in so early.  Nothing in the lobby, the Welcome Center, the kennels.  Loading bays and the physical plant were nominal.  No incoming missiles.  Not so much as a plugged sewer line.
He had heard something, though.  He was sure of that.  And he was sure of something else, too:  he had never heard this particular alarm before.  After all these years, the machines that surrounded him had become more than tools; they were friends, protectors, advisers and trusted servants.  He knew their voices intimately:  the soft beeping of his inlays, the reassuring hum of Building Security, the subtle, multi-octave harmonics of the threat stack.  This alarm hadn't come from any of them.
 Desjardins threw back the sheet and rose from his pallet.  Stonehenge loomed a few meters away, a rough horseshoe of workstations and tactical boards glowing dimly in the darkness.  Desjardins had a more official workspace, many floors above;  he had official live-in quarters too, not luxurious but far more comfortable than the mattress he'd dragged down here.  He still used those accommodations now and then, for official business or other occasions when appearances mattered.   But this was the place he preferred:  secret, safe, an improvised nerve center rising from a gnarled convergence of fiber optic roots leading in from the walls.  This was his throne room and his keep and his bunker.  He knew how absurd that was, given the scope of his powers, the strength of his fortifications—but it was here, in the windowless subterranean dark, where he felt safest.
Scratching himself, he plunked down onto the chair in the center of Stonehenge and began scanning the hardline intel.  The world was full of yellow and red icons, as always, but nothing acute.  Certainly nothing to warrant an audible alert.  Desjardins dumped everything into a single events list and sorted on time; whatever had happened, had just happened.  He scrolled down the list:   CAESAR meltdown in Louisville, static-field failure in Boulder, minor progress re-establishing his surveillance links down along the Panhandle.  More chatter about mutant bugs and weeds spreading up from the Panama line...
Something touched him, lightly, on the leg.  He looked down.
Mandelbrot stared up at him with one eye.  The other was gone, a dark sticky hole in a face torn half away.  Her flank was slick and black in the gloomy half-light. Viscera glistened through matted fur. 
The cat swayed drunkenly, her forepaw still upraised.  She opened her mouth.  With a silent miaow, she toppled.

#

Oh God no.  Oh please God no.
He made the call even before bringing up the lights.  Mandelbrot lay bleeding into a puddle of her own insides.  
Oh Jesus, please.  She's dying.  Don't let her die.
"Hi," the tac board chirped.  "This is Trev Sawyer."
The fuck it was.  It was an interactive, and Desjardins didn't have time to waste dicking around with dialog trees.  He killed the call and accessed the local directory.  "My vet.  Home number.  Kill any overrides."
Somewhere in Sudbury, Sawyer's watch started ringing.
You got into the kennel, again, didn't you?  Mandelbrot lay on her side, chest heaving.   Stupid cat, you never could resist taunting those monsters.  You just figured—oh God, it's amazing you even made it back.
Don't die.  Please don't die.
Sawyer wasn't answering.  Answer your watch, you stumpfucking idiot!  This is an emergency!  Where the fuck can you be at four a.m.?  
Mandelbrot's paws twitched and flexed as if dreaming, as if electrified.  Desjardins wanted to reach out, to staunch the flow or straighten the spine or just pet her for Chrissakes, offer whatever pitiful comfort he could.  But he was terrified that any inexpert touch might just make things worse.
It's my fault.  It's my fault.  I should have scaled back your clearance, you're just a cat after all, you don't know any better.  And I never even bothered to learn what your alarm sounded like, it just never occurred to me that I wouldn't—
Not a dream.  Not a Worldwatch alert.  Just a veterinary implant talking to his wristwatch:  a brief scream as Mandelbrot's vitals lurched into the red, then silence as teeth or claws or sheer pummeling inertia reduced signal to noise.
"Hello?" muttered a sleepy voice in mid-air.
Desjardins's head snapped up.  "This is Achilles Desjardins.  My cat's been mauled by—"
"What?" Sawyer said thickly.  "Do you have any idea what time it is?"
"I'm sorry, I know, but this is an emergency.  My cat's—oh God, she's torn apart, she's barely alive, you've got to—"
"Your cat," Sawyer repeated.  "And why are you telling me?"
"I—you're Mandelbrot's vet, you—"
The voice was icy:  "I haven't been anyone's veterinarian in over three years."
Desjardins remembered:  N'Am's vets had all been conscripted into human service when ?ehemoth—and the thousand opportunistic bugs riding its coattails—had overwhelmed the health-care system.  "But you're still, I mean, you still know what to—"
"Mr. Desjardins, forget the hour.  Do you have any idea what year it is?"
Desjardins shook his head.  "What are you talking about?  My cat's lying on the floor with her—"
"It's five years after the dawn of the Firewitch Era," Sawyer continued in a cold voice.  "People are dying, Mr. Desjardins.  By the millions.  Every day.  To even waste food on a mere animal, under these circumstances, is scandalous.  To expect me to spend time and resources saving an injured cat is nothing short of obscene."
Desjardins eyes stung.  His vision blurred.  "Please—I can help you.  I can.  I'll get your cycler ration doubled.  I can get you unlimited water.  I can get you into fucking geosynch if that's what you want, you and your family.  Anything.  Just name it."
"Very well:  stop wasting my time."
"Do you even know who I am?" Desjardins cried.
"I certainly do.  And I'm astonished that any 'lawbreaker—let alone one of your evident stature—would have such completely misplaced priorities.  Aren't you supposed to be immune to that sort of thing?"
"Please—"
"Good night, Mr. Desjardins."
Disconnect, added a little icon in a corner of one screen.
Blood bubbled at the corner of Mandelbrot's mouth.  Her inner lid slid halfway across that one bloodied eyeball and retracted.
"Oh, fuck...I don't know what to..."
Yes you do.
He bent over her, reached out a hand, pushed tentatively at a bulging loop of intestine.  A spasm shuddered through Mandelbrot like a passing spirit.  She meowed faintly.
"I'm sorry...I'm sorry..."
You know what to do.
He remembered Mandelbrot latching on and biting his father's ankle when the old man had come by to visit back in '48.  He remembered Ken Lubin, standing in Desjardins's bathroom in his underpants, scrubbing his trousers in the sink:  "Your cat pissed on me," he'd said, a hint of grudging respect in his voice.  He remembered a thousand nights pinned on his bed, bladder full to bursting but unwilling to disturb the furry sleeping lump on his chest.   
You know.
He remembered Alice showing up at work, her lacerated hands struggling to hang on to a scrawny, hissing kitten that wasn't taking any shit from anybody:  "Hey Killjoy, want a watch-cat?  Chaos made flesh, she is.  Reversible ears, needs no batteries, guaranteed not to let anyone past your front door with all their body parts..."
You know.  Mandelbrot convulsed again.
He knew.
There was nothing nearby he could use—no injectables, no gas, no projectiles.  All of that stuff was loaded into the booby traps and would take far too long to extract.  The room was a stripped-down shell of bone-gray walls and fiberop vines.  Just a fucking brick, he thought, swallowing against the grief in his throat.  Just a rock, they're all over the place outside...
No time.  Mandelbrot wasn't even living any more, she hadn't been living since she'd started back from the kennels.  All she was doing was suffering.  And all Desjardins could do was end that.
He raised his foot over her head.  "You and me, Brotwurst," he whispered.  "We had higher clearance than anyone inside a thousand klicks..."
Mandelbrot purred once.  Something sagged in her as she left.  Whatever remained lolled bonelessly on the floor; that third eyelid crawled back into partial view, and stopped.
Desjardins kept his foot raised a moment, just in case.  Finally he lowered it slowly onto the concrete floor.  Mandelbrot had never been one to yield the initiative.
"Thank you," whispered Achilles Desjardins, and wept at her side.

#

Dr. Trevor Sawyer woke for the second time in as many hours.  A dark shape hung over his head like a great fist.  It hissed softly, a hovering reptile.
He tried to rise.  He couldn't; his arms and legs wobbled like unresponsive rubber.   His face tingled, his jaw hung slack as overcooked pasta.  Even his tongue felt swollen and flaccid, sagging loose and immovable in his mouth.
He stared up at the ovoid shape above the bed.  It was about half as long as he was, and wider.  A great dark Easter egg hanging in the air, its belly disfigured by barely-discernible ports and blisters reflecting slivers of gray half-light from the hallway.
The hissing subsided.  Sawyer felt a trickle of drool worm onto his cheek from the corner of his mouth.  He tried to swallow, and failed.
He was still breathing.  That was something.
The Easter egg clicked softly.  A faint, almost subsonic hum emanated from somewhere nearby—either a ground-effect field, or the static of nerves misfiring in his cochleae.
It couldn't be a neuroinduction field.  A botfly would never even get off the ground carrying coils that heavy.  Neuromuscular block of some kind, he realized.  It gassed me.
It gassed us...
He willed his head to turn.  It lay like a ten-kilogram rock on the pillow, defying him.  He couldn't move his eyes.  He couldn't even blink.
He could hear Sandra beside him, though, breathing fast and shallow.  She too was awake.
"Went right back to sleep, I see," the botfly remarked in a familiar voice.  "Didn't lose a wink over it, did you?"
Desjardins...?
"It's okay, though," the machine went on.  "Turns out you were right.  Here, let me give you a hand..."
The botfly tilted nose-down and descended until it was literally nuzzling Sawyer's cheek.  It nosed him gently, like a hungry pet pestering its master for food.  Sawyer's head lolled sideways on the pillow, stared past the edge of the bed to the crib against the far wall, barely visible in the gloom.
Oh God, what—
This couldn't be happening.  Achilles Desjardins was a 'lawbreaker, and 'lawbreakers—they simply didn't do this sort of thing.  They couldn't.  Nobody had ever admitted it officially, of course, but Sawyer was connected, he knew the scoop.  There were—restraints, right down at the biochemical level.  To keep 'lawbreakers from misusing their power, to keep them from doing exactly what—
The robot floated across the bedroom.  It came to rest about a meter over the crib.  The thin crescent of a rotating lens glinted on its belly, focusing.
"Kayla, isn't it?" the botfly murmured.  "Seven months, three days, fourteen hours.  I say, Dr. Sawyer. Your genes must be very special, to justify bringing a child into such a shitty world.  I bet it pissed off the neighbors something awful.  How'd you get around the pop-control statutes?"
Please, Sawyer thought.  Don't hurt her.  I'm sorry.  I—
"You know, I bet you cheated," the machine mused.  "I bet this pissy little larva shouldn't even be here.  Ah well.  Like I said before, you were right.  About real people.  They really do die all the time."
Please.  Oh dear God give me strength, let me move, at least give me strength enough to beg—
Bright as the sun, a fiery proboscis licked down through the darkness and set Kayla alight.
The botfly turned and regarded Trevor Sawyer through a dark cyclopean eye, while his child screamed and blackened.
"Why, there goes one now," it remarked.

#

"For Mandelbrot," Desjardins whispered.  "In memory."
He freed the botfly to return to its appointed rounds.  It would not be able to answer any of the inevitable questions resulting from this night, even in the unlikely event that anyone could trace it back to the honeycombed residential warren at 1423-150 Cushing Skywalk.  Even now it could only remember a routine patrol along its prescribed transect; that was all it would remember, until a navigational malfunction sent it on a suicidal corkscrew into the no-go zone around Sudbury's main static-field generator.  There wouldn't be enough left afterwards to reconstruct so much as a lens cluster, let alone an event log.
As for the bodies themselves, even the most superficial investigation would reveal telling indications of Trevor Sawyer's resentment over his forcible conscription into the Health Corps, and previously-unsuspected family ties to the M&M regime recently risen to power in Ghana.  Nobody would waste time asking questions after that; those associated with the Madonna's New Order were notorious for their efforts in bringing down the old one.   With Sawyer's hospital clearance and medical expertise, the damage he could have done to the law-abiding members of the community was incalculable.  Sudbury was better off without him, whether he'd been killed by his own or whether some vigilant 'lawbreaker, near or far, had tracked him to his lair and terminated his terrorist activities with extreme prejudice.
It wasn't as though these kind of surgical strikes didn't happen all the time.  And if some 'lawbreaker was behind it, it was—by definition—all for the best.
One more item checked off the to-do list.  Desjardins wrapped Mandelbrot in his t-shirt and headed outside, cradling the bloody bundle against his bare chest.  He was drowning in a vortex of emotion; he was empty inside.  He tried to resolve the paradox as he ascended to ground level.
Grief, of course, for the loss of a friend he'd had for almost ten years.  Satisfaction for the price exacted in return.  And yet—he had hoped for more than this grim sense of a debt restored.  He had hoped for something more fulfilling.  Joy, perhaps, at the sight of Trevor Sawyer watching his wife and child burn alive.  Joy at the sight of Sawyer's own immolation, flesh crisping from the bones, eyeballs bursting like great gelatinous grubs boiled in their sockets, knowing even there at the end, feeling it all, he'd never even found the strength to whimper.
Joy eluded Desjardins.  Granted he'd never felt it any of the other times he'd balanced the books, but he had hoped for more this time.  Certainly, the cause had been more heartfelt.  But still:  only grief, and satisfaction, and—and something else, something he couldn't quite put his finger on...  
He stepped outside.  Pale morning light rose on all sides.  Mandelbrot was growing cold and stiff in his arms.
He took a few steps and turned to look up at his castle.  It loomed huge and dark and ominous against the brightening sky.  Before Rio, a small city's worth of would-be saviors had labored there.  Now it was all his.
Gratitude, he realized, astonished.  That's what he felt.  Gratitude for his own grief.  He still loved.  He could still feel, with all his heart.  Until this night and this loss, he had never been completely sure.
Alice had been right all along.  Sociopath was far too small a word to contain whatever it was he had become.
Perhaps he'd go and tell her, once he'd laid beloved Mandelbrot to rest.
DISARMOR
LEAVE CADAVERS HERE ONLY
UNAUTHORIZED DISPOSAL WILL BE PROSECUTED
N'AMAT/CSIRA BIOHAZARDS STATUTE 4023-A-25-SUB5

It was a three-walled enclosure, open to the sky, south of the 184 just outside Ellsworth.  The sign had been sprayed onto the inside of the rear wall; the smart paint cycled through a half dozen languages, holding on each for a few seconds in turn.  Clarke and Ouellette stood at the open side, looking in.  
The grated floor was crusted with old lime, cracked and scaling like a dried-up desert lakebed.  It was obviously years since it had been replenished.  Four bodies lay on that substrate.  One had been carefully set to rest with its arms folded across its chest; it was bloated and black, squirming with maggots beneath a nimbus of flies.  The other three were desiccated and disarrayed, like clumps of leaves strewn about and abandoned by a strong wind.  Limbs and one head were missing.
Ouellette gestured at the sign.  "They actually gave a damn back in the old days.  People would end up in jail for burying their loved ones in the back rose garden.  Endangering the public health."  She grunted, remembering.   "They couldn't stop ?ehemoth.  They couldn't stop the coattail plagues.  But at least they could lock up some poor old woman who hadn't wanted to see her dead husband go up in flames."
Clarke smiled faintly. "People like to feel, what's the word..."  
"Proactive," Ouellette suggested.
"That's it."
Ouellette nodded.  "To give them their due, though, it was a problem back then.  There were a lot more bodies lying around—they were stacked up to your shoulder, even out here.  For a while, cholera was killing more people than ?ehemoth."
Clarke eyed the structure.  "Why stick it way out here?"
Ouellette shrugged.  "They had them everywhere." 
Clarke stepped into the enclosure.  Ouellette put a restraining hand on her shoulder.  "You better stick with the older ones.  There's no end to the things you could catch off that fresh one."
Clarke shrugged off the hand.  "What about you?"
"I'm broad-spectrumed up to here.  There's not much that can get me."
The doctor approached the cadaver from upwind, for all the good it did; the light breeze wasn't nearly enough to dispel the stench.  Clarke, keeping the greater distance, fought the urge to gag and closed on her own assignment of body parts.  She held out her can of steriwrap like a crucifix and pressed the stud; the wizened, one-legged body at her feet glistened as the aerosol laminate hardened on its surface.
"These are actually in pretty good shape," Ouellette remarked, spraying down her own corpse.  "Not so long ago you had to check twice a week if you wanted to find a leg bone connected to a knee bone.  Scavengers had a field day."  She was spraying it thick, Clarke noted without surprise.  She might be immune to whatever diseases festered in that body, but it still wasn't going to be any treat to carry it around.
"So what changed?" Clarke asked.
"No more scavengers."
Clarke rolled the mummified remains with her foot and sprayed down the other side.  The wrap hardened in seconds.  She scooped the shrouded body into her arms.  It was like carrying a loose bundle of firewood.  The steriwrap squeaked faintly against her diveskin.
"Just feed it into Miri," Ouellette told her, still spraying.  "I've already changed the settings."
The MI's tongue stuck out to starboard.  Crinkly silver foil  lined its throat.  Clarke set the remains on the pallet; the tongue began to retract as soon as the weight had settled.  Miri swallowed and closed her mouth.
"Do I have to do anything?" Clarke called.
"Nope.  She knows the difference between a live body and a dead one."
A deep, almost subsonic hum sounded briefly from within the MI.
Ouellette dragged a humanoid cocoon from the compound.  Its bloated features had vanished entirely under layers of fibrous plastic, as though Ouellette were some monstrous spider given to gift-wrapping prey.  The surface of the shroud was peppered with the bodies of trapped insects, half-embedded.  They twitched, dying, against their constraints.
Clarke reached out to give Ouellette a hand.  Something sloshed faintly as the weight shifted between them.  Miri opened her mouth—empty again—and belched hot, dusty breath into Clarke's face.  The tongue extended as though from some enormous, insatiable baby bird.
"Can your skin breathe in that thing?"  Ouellette asked over Miri's second helping.
"What, my diveskin?"
"Your real skin.  Can it breathe under all that copolymer?"
"Copolymer's pretty much what I've worn for the past five years.  Hasn't killed me yet."
"It can't be good for you, though.  It was designed to keep you alive in the deep sea; I can't imagine it's healthy to wear it in an atmosphere all the time."
"Don't see why not."  Clarke shrugged.  "It breathes, it thermoregulates.  Keeps me nice and homeostatic."
"In water, Laurie.  Air has completely different properties.  If nothing else, I bet you've got a Vitamin K deficiency."
"I'm fine," Clarke said neutrally.  Not that it's any of your business...
The MI hummed contentedly.
"If you say so," Ouellette said at last.
Miri gaped for more.

#

They plotted their course by derelict road signs and inboard maps.  Ouellette steadfastly refused to go online.  Clarke had to wonder at the stops marked along their route.  Belfast?  Camden?  Freeport?  They'd barely been dots on a map even before the world ended:  why not go to Bangor, just a few klicks to the north?  That was where the people would be.
"Not any more," Ouellette said, raising her voice above a frenetic orchestral seesaw she’d attributed to some Russian maniac called Prokofiev.
"Why not?"
"Cities are the graveyard of  Mankind."  It had the ring of a quote.  "There was this threshold, I don't remember what it was exactly.  Some magic number of people per hectare.  Any urban center was way up on the wrong side of it.  Something like ?ehemoth, set loose in a high-density urban area—not to mention all the ancillary pathogens that hitched a ride in its wake—it takes off like a brush fire.  One person sneezes, a hundred get sick.  Germs love crowds."
"But small towns were okay?"
"Well, not okay, obviously.  But things didn't spread as fast—the spread's still going on, actually.  The towns were small and seasonal, and the areas in between were pretty much owned by the whitecaps."   Ouellette gestured at the withering foliage scrolling past the windshield.  "This was all privately owned.  Rich old rs and Ks who didn't mingle, had good medical.  They're gone now too, of course."
Gone to Atlantis, Clarke surmised.  Some of them, anyway.
"So the big cities had exactly two choices when Firewitch came calling," Ouellette continued.  "They could either throw up the barricades and the static-field generators, or they could implode.  A lot of them couldn't afford generators, so they imploded by default.  I haven't been to Bangor since fifty-three.  For all I know they never even cleaned up the bodies."

#

They got their first live customers at Bucksport.    
They pulled off the main drag at about two a.m., next to a Red Cross Calvin cycler with a worrisome yellow telltale winking from its panel.  Ouellette examined it by the light of an obsolete billboard, running on stored solar, that worked ceaselessly to sell them on the benefits of smart cloth and dietary proglottids.  
"Needs restocking." She climbed back into Miri and called up a menu.
"I thought they got everything they needed from the air," Clarke said.  That's what photosynthesis was, after all—she'd been amazed to discover how many complex molecules were nothing more than various combinations of nitrogen, carbon, and oh-two.
"Not trace elements."  Ouellette grabbed a cellulose cartridge, it compartments filled with red and ochre paste, from the dispensing slot.  "This one's low on iron and potassium."
The billboard was still hawking its nonexistent wares the next morning when Clarke squeezed herself into Miri's toilet cubicle.  When she came out again, two silhouettes were plastered against the windshield.
She stepped carefully over Ouellette and climbed up between the bucket seats.  Two Hindian boys—one maybe six, the other verging on adolescence—stared in at her.  She leaned forward and stared back.  Two pairs of dark eyes widened in surprise; the younger boy emitted a tiny yelp.  The next second both had scampered away.
"It's your eyes," Ouellette said behind her.
Clarke turned.  The doctor was sitting up, hugging the back of the driver's seat from behind.  She blinked, gummy-eyed in the morning light.
"And the suit," she continued.  "Seriously, Laurie, you look like some kind of cut-rate zombie in that get-up."  She reached behind her and tapped the locker in the rear wall.  "You could always borrow something of mine."
She was getting used to the name.  Ouellette's unsolicited advice was another matter.
A half-dozen people were already lined up when they climbed out into daylight.  Ouellette smiled at them as she strode around to the back of the vehicle and lifted the awning.  Clarke followed, still sleepy; Miri's mouths opened as she passed.  The throat's silver lining had withdrawn, exposing a grid of sensor heads studding the cylindrical wall behind.
Icons and telltales flickered across the panel on Miri's backside.  Ouellette played them with absent-minded expertise, her eyes on the accumulating patients.  "Everybody's standing, nobody's bleeding.  And no obvious cases of ?ehemoth.  Good start."
Half a block behind the billboard, the two children Clarke had surprised pulled a middle-aged woman into sight around the corner of a long-defunct restaurant.  She moved at her own pace, resisting her children as though they were eager dogs straining to slip the leash.  Further down the road, picking his way across scattered debris and asphalt-cracking clumps of grass, a man limped forward on a cane.
"We just got here," Clarke murmured.
"Yup.  Usually I blast the music for a couple of minutes, just to let people know.  But a lot of the time it isn't even necessary."
Clarke panned the street.  A dozen now, at least.  "Somebody really spread the word."
"And that," Ouellette told her, "is how we're going to win."

#

Bucksport was one of Ouellette's regular stops.  The locals knew her, or at least knew of her.  She knew them, and ministered unto them as she always had, her omnipresent music playing softly in the background.  The sick and the injured passed like boluses of food through Miri's humming depths; sometimes the passage would take only moments, and Ouellette would be waiting at the other side with a derm or injection, or some viral countervector to be snorted like an antique alkaloid.  Other times the patients would linger inside while the MI knitted their bones back together, or spliced torn ligaments, or burned out malignancies with bursts of focused microwaves.  Occasionally the problem was so obvious that Ouellette could diagnose it with a glance, and cure it with a shot and a word of advice.
Clarke helped when she could, which was rarely; Miri maintained its own inventories, and Ouellette had little need of Clarke's limited expertise in fish bites.  Ouellette taught her some basics on the fly and let her triage the line-up.  Even that wasn't entirely successful.  The rules were easy enough but some of the younger ferals recoiled at Clarke's appearance:  the strange black skin that seemed to ripple when you weren't quite looking; the little outcroppings of machinery from flesh; the glassy, featureless eyes that both looked at you and didn't, that belonged not so much to a human being as to some unconvincing robot imposter.  
Eventually Clarke contented herself with the adults, and gave them vital tips while they waited their turn.  There was, after all, more to dispense than medical attention..  Now there were instructions.  Now, there was a plan.  
Wait for the missiles, she told them.  Watch the starbursts; track the fragments as they fall, find them on the ground.   This is what you look for; this is what it is.  Take whatever samples you can—soil in mason jars, rags swept through aerosol clouds at ground zero, anything.  A teaspoon-full might be enough.  A tin can, half full, could be a windfall.  Whatever you can get, however you can get it.
Be fast:  the lifters may be coming.  Grab what you can and run.  Get away from the impact zone, hide from the flamethrowers any way you can.  Tell others, tell everyone; spread the word and the method.  But no radio.  No networks, no fiberop, no wireless.  The ether will fuck you up the ass if you let it; trust only to word-of-mouth. 
Find us at Freeport, or Rumford, or places between.  Come back to us: bring us what you have.
There may be hope.

#

Augusta made her skin crawl.  Literally.
They approached from the east, just before midnight, along the 202.  Taka took them off the main drag in favor of a gravel road a short ways down the gentle slope of the Kennebec River valley.  They parked on a ridge that overlooked the shallow topography below.
Everything this side of the river had been abandoned; almost everything on the far side had been, too.  The bright core that remained huddled amidst a diffuse spread of dark, empty ruins left over from the good old days.  Its nimbus reflected off the cloud bank overhead, turned the whole tableau to grainy, high-contrast black-and-white.
Faint gooseflesh rippled along Clarke's arms and nape.  Even her diveskin seemed to be, well, shivering, a sensation so subtle it hovered on the threshold of imagination.
"Feel that?"  Ouellette said.
Clarke nodded.
"Static-field generator.  We're just on the outer edge of the field."
"So it gets worse inside?"
"Not right inside, of course.  The field's directed outward.  But yeah, the closer you get to the perimeter, the more your hair stands on end.  Once you're inside you don't feel it.  Not that way, at least.  There are other effects."
"Like what?"
"Tumors."  Ouellette shrugged.  "Better than the alternative, I guess."
A cheek-to-jowl cluster of lights and architecture rose against the dark, its outlines suggesting the contours of a crude, pixelated dome.  The new Augusta was obviously squeezing every cubic centimeter it could out of the safe zone.  "We going in there?"  Clarke asked.
 Ouellette shook her head.  "They don't need us."
"Can we go in there?"  For all its lost stature, Augusta must still have portals into the pipe.  Lubin might have been better off sticking with them after all.
"You mean, like shore leave?  Stop by on our way through for some VR and a hot whirlpool?"  The doctor laughed softly.  "Doesn't work that way.  They'd probably let us in if there were some kind of emergency, but everybody kind of sticks to their own these days.  Miri's out of Boston."
"So you could get into Boston."  Even better.
"It is kind of beautiful at night, though," Ouellette remarked.  "For all its carcinogenic properties.  Almost like the northern lights."
Clarke watched her without speaking.
"Don't you think?"
She decided not to push it.  "Night looks pretty much like day to me.  Just not as much color."
"Right.  The eyes."  Ouellette gave her a sideways look.  "Don't you ever get tired of daylight all the time?"
"Not really."
"You should try taking them out now and then, just for a change.  Sometimes when you see too much, you miss a lot."
Clarke smiled.  "You sound like a fortune cookie."
Ouellette shrugged.  "It wouldn't hurt your bedside manner, either.  Patients might relate to you better without the affect, you know?"
 "There's not much I can do for your patients anyway."
"Oh, that's not—"
"And if there is," Clarke continued, her voice conspicuously neutral, "then they can accept my help without dictating my choice of wardrobe."
"Rrrright," Ouellette said after a moment.  "Sorry."
They sat in silence for a while.  Finally Ouellette threw Miri back into gear and cued her music— an adrenaline discord of saxophone and electric percussion at serious odds with her usual tastes.
"We're not stopping here?" Clarke asked.
"Goosebumps keep me awake.  Probably not all that good for Miri either.  I just thought you'd enjoy the view, is all."
They headed further along the road.  The prickling of Clarke's skin faded in moments.
Ouellette kept driving.  The music segued into a spoken interlude with musical accompaniment—some story about a hare who’d lost his spectacles, whatever those were.  "What is this?" Clarke asked.
"TwenCen stuff.  I can turn it off if you—"
"No.  That’s fine."  
Ouellette killed it anyway.  Miri drove on in silence.
"We could stop anytime," Clarke said after a few minutes.
"A little further.  It's dangerous around the cities."
"I thought we were past the field."
"Not cancer.  People."  Ouellette tripped the autopilot and sat back in the bucket seat.  "They tend to hang around just outside the claves and get envious."
"Miri can't handle them?"
"Miri can slice and dice them a dozen ways to Sunday.  I'd just as soon avoid the confrontation."
Clarke shook her head.  "I can't believe Augusta wouldn't have let us in."
"I told you.  The claves keep to themselves."
"Then why even bother sending you out?  If everyone up here is so bloody self-centered, why help out the wildlands in the first place?"
Ouellette snorted softly.  "Where've you been for the past five years?"  She held up her hand:  "Stupid question.  We're not out here for altruism, Laurie.  The MI fleet, the salt licks—"
"Salt licks?"
"Feeding stations.  It's all just to keep the ferals from storming the barricades.  If we bring them a few morsels, maybe they won't be quite so motivated to bring ?ehemoth into our own backyards."
It made the usual sense, Clarke had to admit.  And yet...
"No.  They wouldn't send their best and brightest out for a lousy crowd-control assignment."
"You got that right."
"Yeah, but you—"
"Me?  I'm the best and the brightest?"  Ouellette slapped her forehead.  "What in the name of all that's living gave you that idea?"
"I saw you work," Clarke said.
"You saw me take orders from a machine without screwing up too much.  A few day's training, I could teach you to do as well for most of these cases."
"That's not what I meant.  I've seen doctors in action before, Taka.  You're different.  You—"  One of Ouellette's own phrases popped into her head:  bedside manner.
"You care," she finished simply.
"Ah."  Ouellette said.  And then, looking straight ahead:  "Don't confuse compassion with competence, Laurie.  It's dangerous."
Clarke studied her.  "Dangerous.  That's a strange word to use."
"In my profession, competence doesn't kill people," Ouellette said.  "Compassion can."
"You killed someone?"
"Hard to tell.  That's the thing about incompetence.  It's not nearly so clear-cut as deliberate malice."
"How many?"  Clarke asked.
Ouellette looked at her.  "Are you keeping score?"
"No.  Sorry."  Clarke looked away.
But if I was, she thought, I'd blow you out of the water.  She knew it wasn't a fair comparison.  One death, she supposed, could be a greater burden than a thousand if it mattered enough to you.  If you bothered to get involved.
If you had compassion.
Finally they pulled into a remote clearing further up the slope.  Ouellette folded down her pallet and turned in with a few monosyllables.  Clarke sat unmoving in her seat, watching the gray-on-gray clarity of the nightscape beyond the windshield:  gray meadow grasses, charcoal ranks of spindly conifer, scabby outcroppings of worn bedrock.  Overcast, tissue-paper sky.
From behind, faint snores.
She fished behind her seat and snagged her backpack.  The eyecap vial had settled to the very bottom, a victim of chronic inattention.  She held it in her hand for a long time before popping it open.
Each eyecap covered the entire visible cornea, and then some.  Suction tugged at her eyeballs as she pulled them off; they broke free with a soft popping sound.
It was as if her eyes, not just their coverings, had been pulled out.  It was like going blind.  It was like being in the deep sea, far from any light.  
It wasn't altogether unpleasant.
At first there was nothing, anywhere;  irises grow lazy when photocollagen does all their heavy lifting.  After a while, though, they remembered to dilate.  A swathe of dark gray brightened the void directly ahead:  faint nocturnal light, through the windshield.
She felt her way out of the MI and leaned against its flank.  She let the door hiss shut as softly as possible.  The night air cooled her face and hands.
Diffuse brightness registered at the corner of her eye, fading every time she focused on it.  Before long she could tell the sky from the treeline.  Dim, roiling gray over serrated shadow; it seemed marginally brighter to the east.
She wandered a few meters and looked back:  Miri's smooth, startling edges almost glimmered against this fractal landscape.  To the west, through a break in the cloud, she saw stars.
She walked.
She tripped over roots and holes half a dozen times, for want of illumination. But the color scheme was pretty much the same as that served up by her eyecaps, gray on gray on black.  The only difference was that contrast and brightness were cranked way down.
When the sky began brightening to the east she saw that she'd been climbing up a denuded gravelly hillside populated by stumps, an old clear-cut that had never recovered.  It must have been like this long before ?ehemoth had arrived on the scene.
Everything's dying, she'd said.
And Ouellette had replied That was happening anyway...
Clarke looked down the way she'd come.  Miri sat like a toy on the edge of what must have been an old logging road.  Brown trees lined the far side of the road, and the hill she stood on to either side; they'd been razored away down the swath she'd just climbed.
Suddenly she had a shadow.  It stretched down the slope like the outline of a murdered giant.  She turned:  a fluorescent red sun was just cresting the hill.  Ribbed clouds above glowed radioactive salmon.  They reminded Clarke of wave-sculpted corrugations on a sandy seabed, but she couldn't ever remember seeing colors so intense.
Losing your sight every night might not be so bad, she reflected, if this is how you get it back in the morning.
The moment passed, of course.  The sun had only had a few degrees to work with, a narrow gap of clear distant sky between the land below and the clouds overhead.  Within a few minutes it had risen behind a thick bank of stratus, faded to a pale bright patch in an expanse of featureless gray.
Alyx, she thought.
Ouellette would be up soon, steeling herself for another pointless day spent in the service of the greater good.  Making a difference that made no difference.
Maybe not the greater good, Clarke thought.  Maybe, the greater need.  
She started down the hill.  Ouellette was climbing into daylight by the time Clarke reached the road.  She blinked against the gray morning, and blinked again when she saw the rifter's naked eyes.
"You said you could teach me," Clarke said.
STARGAZER
She's okay, Dave, Taka said to her dead husband.  She's a bit scary at first—Crys would take one look at her and run out of the room. Definitely not much of a people person.
But she's fine, Dave, really.  And if you can't be here with me, at least she pulls her own weight.
Miri drove down old I-95 through the ramshackle remains of a town called Freeport; it had died with the departure of the fish and the tourists, long before ?ehemoth had made everything so definitive.  South of town they pulled onto a side road that ended at a secluded cove.  Taka was relieved to see that the scraggly woodlands above the high-tide line were still mostly green.  She cheered them on.
"Why here, exactly?" Laurie wondered as they debarked.
"Electric eel."  Taka unlocked the charge cap on the side of the vehicle and took the socket in one hand.  The cable unspooled behind her as she headed down slope.  Cobble slipped and clattered beneath her feet. 
Laurie paced her to the water's edge.  "What?"
"On the bottom somewhere."  Kneeling, Taka fished the hailer out of her windbreaker and slipped it into the water.  "Hopefully the little bastard still comes when you call him."
A small eruption of bubbles, twenty meters offshore.  A moment later the eel surfaced in their wake and squirmed towards them, orange and serpentine.  It beached itself at Taka's feet, a giant fluorescent sperm with a tail trailing off into the depths.  It even had fangs:  a two-pronged metal mouth disfiguring the surface of the bulb.
She plugged the cable into it.  The bulb hummed.
"They stashed these things here and there," she explained, "so we're not completely dependent on the lifters."
Laurie eyed the calm water in the cove.  "Ballard stack?"
"CAESAR reactor."
"You're kidding."
Taka shook her head.  "Self-contained, self-maintained, disposable.  Basically just a big block with a couple of radiator fins.  Drop it into any open body of water and it's good to go.  It doesn't even have any controls—it automatically matches voltage to whatever the line draws."
Laurie whistled.
Taka scooped up a flat stone and skipped it across the water.  "So when's Ken going to show up?"
"Depends."
"On what?"
"On whether he got into Portland."  And then, after a curious hesitation: "And whether he ditched us back at Penobscot."
"He didn't," Ken said.
They turned.  He was standing behind them.
"Hi." Laurie's face didn't change, but some subtle tension seemed to ebb from her body.  "How'd it go?"
He shook his head.

#

It was almost as if the past two weeks hadn't happened.  Ken reappeared, as ominous and indecipherable as ever:  and just like that, Laurie faded away.  It was a subtle transition—some slight sudden stiffness in the way she held herself,  a small flattening of affect—but to Taka, the change was as clear as a slap in the face.  The woman she had come to know as an ally and even a friend submerged before her eyes.  In its place stood that humanoid cipher who had first confronted her on the slopes of a guttering wasteland, fourteen days before.
Ken and Laurie conversed a little ways down the beach while Miri recharged.  Taka couldn't hear what they said, but doubtless Ken was reporting on his Portland expedition.  Debriefing, Taka thought, watching them.  For Ken, that word seemed to fit.  And the trip had not gone well, judging by the body language and the look on his face.
Then again, he always looks like that, she reminded herself.  She tried to imagine what it might take to wipe away that chronic deadpan expression and replace it with something approaching a real emotion.  Maybe you'd have to threaten his life.  Maybe a fart in an elevator would do it.
They headed back into town once Miri was sated.  Lubin crouched in the space between the bucket seats, the women on either side.  Taka got the sense of gigabytes passing between the other two, although they spoke perhaps a half-dozen words each.
Freeport was another regular stop on the trap line; Taka pulled up at a parking lot off Main and Howard, beside the gashed façade of a defunct clothing store called (she always smiled at it) The Gap.  The town as a whole, like most of them, was long dead.  Individual cells still lingered on in the rotting corpus, though, and some were already waiting when Miri arrived.  Taka blared Stravinsky for a few minutes anyway, to spread the word.  Others appeared over time, emerging from the shells of buildings and the leaky hulls of old fishing boats kept afloat in some insane hope that the witch might be afraid of water. 
She and Laurie got to work.  Ken stayed out of sight near the back of the cab; shadows and the dynamic tinting of Miri's windows rendered him all but invisible from the outside.  Taka asked about Portland over an assembly-line of broken arms and rotting flesh.  Lenie shrugged, pleasant but distant:  "He could've got in all right.  Just not without getting noticed."
No surprise there.  A scorched zone surrounded Portland's landside perimeter, a flat, sensor-riddled expanse across which Taka couldn't imagine anyone crossing undetected.  An enervated, membranous skin guarded the seaward approaches.  You couldn't just sneak into the place—into any clave, for that matter—and Ken evidently lacked the resources to break in by force.
Every now and then Taka would glance absently at the windshield as she moved among her patients.  Sometimes she caught sight of two faint, glimmering pinpoints looking back, motionless and unblinking behind the dark reflections.
She didn't know what he might be doing in there.  She didn't ask.

#

It was as if night were a black film laid over the world, and the stars mere pinpricks through which daylight passed.
"There," Ken said, pointing.  
Fine needles, three or four of them.  Their tips etched the film high in the west, left faint scratches across Bootes.  They faded in seconds; Taka would never have seen them on her own.
"You're sure we're safe," she said.
He was a silhouette, black on black against the stars to her left.  "They're past us already," he told her.  Which was not the same thing.
"There go the intercepts," Laurie said behind them.  Brief novae flared near Hercules—not contrails, but the ignition of antimissile salvos dropped from orbit.  They'd be below the horizon by the time they hit atmosphere.
It was after midnight.  They were standing on a rocky hill south of Freeport.  Almost everything was stars and sky; the insignificant circle of earth below the horizon was black and featureless.  They'd come here following the beeping of Ken's handpad, linked to a periscope floating somewhere in the ocean behind them.  Evidently their submarine— Phocoena, Laurie had called it— was a stargazer.
Taka could see why.  The Milky Way was so beautiful it hurt.
"Maybe this is it," she murmured.  It was unlikely, she knew; this was only the second attack since they'd put their plan into motion, and how far could the word have spread by now?
And yet, three attacks in as many weeks.  At that rate, they had to get lucky before too long...
"Don't count on it," Ken said.
She glanced at him, and glanced away.  Not so long ago this man had stood at her back, one hand clamped easily on her neck, instructing Laurie in the disassembly of weapons systems that Taka could barely even name.  He had been pleasant enough, then and since, because Taka had cooperated.   He had been polite because she'd never stood in his way.
But Ken was on a mission, and Taka's little experiment in grass-roots salvation didn't seem to factor into it.  He was playing along with her for some indecipherable reason of his own;  there was no guarantee that tomorrow, or the next day, he wouldn't run out of patience and go back to his original game plan.  Taka didn't know what that was, although she gathered it had something to do with helping Ken and Laurie's waterlogged kindred; she had learned not to waste time pressing either of them for details.  It had involved getting into the Portland clave, which evidently Ken had not been able to do on his own.
It had also involved hijacking Taka's MI, which he had.   
Now she was alone with two empty-eyed ciphers in the dead of night and the middle of nowhere.  Beneath the intermittent camaraderie, the humanitarian pitching-in, and all the best-laid plans, one fact remained unassailable:  she was a prisoner.  She'd been a prisoner for weeks.
How could I have forgotten that? she wondered, and answered her own question:  because they hadn't hurt her...yet.  They hadn't threatened her...lately.  Neither of her captors seemed to indulge in conflict for its own sake; hereabouts that was the very pinnacle of civilized behavior.  She had simply forgotten to feel endangered.
Which was pretty stupid, when you got right down to it.  After the failure at Portland, there was every chance that Lubin would revert to Plan A and take her vehicle.  Laurie might or might no go along with that—Taka hoped that some bond remained beneath that cool reinstated façade—but that might not make much difference either way.
And there was no telling what either of them would do if Taka tried to get in their way.  Or if they ran out of more efficient alternatives.  At the very best, she could be stranded in the middle of the wildlands—an immunized angel with clipped wings, and no Miri to back her up the next time some red-eyed man came looking for salvation.
"I'm getting a signal from Montreal," Ken said.  "Encrypted.  I'm guessing it's a scramble."
"Lifters?" Laurie suggested.  Ken grunted an affirmative.
Taka cleared her throat.  "I'll be back in a sec.  I have to take a wicked pee."
"I'll come with you," Laurie said immediately.
"Don't be silly."  Taka waved downhill into the darkness, where the peak they occupied emerged from threadbare woodlands.  "It's only a few meters.  I can find my way."
Two starlit silhouettes turned and regarded her without a word.  Taka swallowed and took a step downhill.
Ken and Laurie didn't move.
Another step.  Another.  Her foot came down on a rock; she wobbled momentarily.
Her captors turned back to their tactics and machinery.  Taka moved carefully downhill.  Starlight limned the bare outlines of obstacles in her path.  A moon would have been nice, though; she tripped twice before the tree-line rose before her, a ragged black band engulfing the stars.
As it engulfed Taka herself, a few moments later.
She looked back up the hill through a black mesh of scrub and tree trunks; Ken and Laurie still stood at the top of the hill, motionless black cutouts against the sky.  Taka couldn't tell whether they could see her, or even whether they were looking in her direction.  She'd be plainly visible to them if she were standing in the open.  Fortunately, not even their night-creature eyes could penetrate tree trunks.
She had a few minutes at most before they realized she was gone.
She moved as quickly as she could without raising a racket.  Thankfully there wasn't much undergrowth; in better days the sunlight filtering through the canopy had been too sparse, and more recently—more recently, sunlight was hardly the limiting factor.  Taka felt her way blindly through a maze of vertical shafts and leaf litter and thin soil rotten with ?ehemoth.  Low branches clawed at her face. Gnarled old tree trunks resolved from the darkness barely a meter ahead; young spindly ones jumped out at her with even less warning.
A root caught her foot; she toppled, biting back a cry.  One outstretched hand came down hard on a fallen branch.  The sound it made, snapping, echoed like a gunshot.  She lay twisted on the ground, nursing her scraped palm, straining to hear any sounds from up the slope.
Nothing.
She kept going.  The slope was steeper now, more treacherous.  The trees that sprang up in her path were only skeletons, dry and brittle and eager to betray her with the firecracker report of every snapped twig and broken branch.  One of them caught her just below the knee;  she pitched forward, hit the ground, and couldn't stop.  She tumbled down the slope, rocks and treefall stabbing her in passing.
The ground disappeared.  Suddenly she could almost see.  A broad dim swathe of gray rushed towards her;  she recognized it in the instant before it struck her, peeling skin from her forearm.
The road.  It  ran around this side of the hill like a hemline.  Miri was parked somewhere along its length.
Taka got to her feet and looked around.  She'd had no way to plot her course down the hill, no way of knowing exactly where on the road she'd landed.  She guessed, and turned right, and ran.
The road was clear, thank God, its dim gravel albedo just enough to keep her oriented and on track.  It unspooled gently around the shoulder of the hill, shattered stone crunching beneath her feet, and suddenly something glinted in the darkness ahead, something straight-edged and shiny under the stars...
Oh thank God.  Yes.  Yes!
She yanked open the driver's-side door and piled inside, panting.
And hesitated.
What are you going to do, Tak?  Run out on everything you've been trying to do for the past two weeks?  Just drive away and let the witch take over, even though there may be a way to stop it?  Sooner or later someone's going to strike gold, and this is where you've told them to bring it.  What happens when they show up and you've run off with your tail between your legs?
Are you going to call for help?  You think it would come before Ken and Laurie had their way with you, or just hopped into that submarine of theirs and disappeared back into the Mariana Trench?  Do you think it would come at all, these days?  And what about tipping off the enemy, Tak?  What about whoever or whatever is trying to stop the very thing you're trying to help along? Are you going to risk all that, just because of something two borderline personalities with funny eyes might do if you got them angry? 
Taka shook her head.  This was insane.  She had a few precious moments before Ken and Laurie tracked her down.  What she decided in that interval might decide the fate of New England—of North America, even.  She couldn't afford to be hasty, but there was no time—.
I need time.  I just need to get away for a while.  I need to work this out.  She reached out and thumbed the ignition pad.
Miri stayed dark.
She tried again.  Nothing.  Nothing but the memory of Ken lurking in this very cab, eyes glittering, surrounded by all that circuitry he seemed to know so much about.
She closed her eyes.  When she opened them again, he was staring in at her.
Ken opened her door.  "Anything wrong?" he asked.
Taka sighed.  Her abrasions oozed and stung in the silence.
Laurie opened the passenger door and climbed in.  "Let's head back," she said, almost gently.
"I—why are—"
"Go on," Ken said, gesturing at the dashboard.
Taka put her thumb on the pad.  Miri hummed instantly to life.
She stepped out of the cab to let Lubin enter.  Overhead, the heavens were crammed with stars.
Oh, David, she thought.  How I wish you were here.
SLEEPER
Everything changed at ten-thirty the next morning.
The bike skidded into view just past Bow and promptly got into an argument with its rider over how best to deal with a pothole the size of Arkansas.  It was a late-model Kawasaki from just before the witch, and it had ground-effect stabilizers that made it virtually untippable; otherwise, both man and machine would have gone end-over-end into a solar-powered billboard that (even after all these years) flickered with dead-celebrity endorsements for Johnson & Johnson immune boosters.  Instead, the Kawasaki leaned sideways at some impossibly acute angle, righted itself en route, and slewed to a stop between Miri and a handful of feral children looking for freebies.
Ken's white eyes appeared in the shadowy darkness of the gap in The Gap, behind the newcomer.
The rider was all limbs and scraps, topped by a ragged thatch of butchered brown hair.  Barely visible against a backdrop of grimy skin, a sparse moustache said maybe sixteen.  "You the doctor with the missiles?" 
"I'm the doctor who's interested in the missiles," Taka told him.
"I'm Ricketts.  Here."  He reached under a threadbare thermochrome jacket and hauled out a ziplock bag with some very dirty laundry wadded up inside.
"What's this?" Taka took the bag between thumb and forefinger.
Ricketts ticked off a list on his fingers:  "Gauchies, a shirt, and one sock.  They had to, you know, improvise.  I had the only bag, and I was way over on another run."
Laurie climbed out of the cab.  "Tak?"
"Hullo," Ricketts said.  His mouth split in an appreciative grin; one tooth chipped, two missing, the rest in four shades of yellow.  His eyes ran down Lenie like a bar coder.  Not that Taka could blame him; out here, anyone with clear skin and all their teeth qualified as a sex symbol almost by default. 
She snapped her fingers to get him back to the real world.  "What is this, exactly?" 
"Right."  Ricketts came back to point.  "Weg and Moricon found one of those canister thingies you put the word out about.  It was leaking this shit all over.  Not like, rivers of the stuff, you know, just like sweating it almost.  So they soaked it up in that"—a gesture at the bag—"and handed it off to me.  I've been driving all night."
"Where's this from?" Taka asked.
"You mean, where we found it?  Burlington."  
It was almost too good to be true.
"That's in Vermont," he added helpfully.
Ken was suddenly at Rickett's shoulder. "There was a missile drop on Vermont?" he said.
The boy turned, startled.  Saw Ken.  Saw the eyes.
"Nice caps," he said approvingly.  "I was into rifters myself back before, you know..."
Rifters, Taka remembered.  They'd run geothermal stations way off the west coast...
"The missiles," Ken said.  "Do you remember how many there were?"
"Dunno. Like, maybe four or five that I saw, but you know."
"Were there lifters?  Was there a burn?"
"Yeah, someone said there might be.  That was why we all scrambled."
"But was there?"
"I dunno.  I didn't hang around.  You guys wanted this stuff fast, right?"
"Yes.  Yes." Taka looked at the fouled, greasy wad in the bag.  It was the most beautiful sight she'd ever seen.  "Ricketts, thank you.  You have no idea how important this could be."
"Yeah, well if you really wanna be grateful how about a charge off your rig?"  He slapped the bike between his thighs.  "This thing is like down to the moho, I've got maybe another ten klicks and—or hey, is there maybe some kinda reward?"

#

The reward, Taka thought, unlocking the umbilical for Rickett's bike, is that all of us might not be dead in ten years.
She fed the treasure into the sample port with tender reverence, let Miri slice away the packaging and squeeze the gold from the dross.  And there was gold, evident as much in what wasn't there as in what was: ?ehemoth was far below the usual baseline in this sample.  Almost negligible.
Something's killing the witch.  That initial explanation, that validation of  a belief already grown from hope to near-certainty over the past weeks, threatened to squash all the scientific caution Taka's training had instilled in her.  She forced caution onto her excitement.  She would run the tests.  She would do the legwork.  But some squealing inner undergrad knew it would only confirm what she already knew, what this first glorious result suggested.  Something was killing the witch.
And there it was.  Mixed in with the molds and the fungi and the fecal coliform, it glimmered like a string of pearls half-buried in mud: a genetic sequence that Miri's database didn't recognize.  She brought it up, and blinked.  That can't be right.  She whistled through her teeth.
"What?"  Laurie asked at her elbow.
"This is going to take longer than I thought,"  Taka said.
"Why?"
"Because I've never seen anything like this before."
"Maybe we have," Ken said.
"I don't think so.  Not unless you've—"  Taka stopped.  Miri was flashing an interface alert at her:  someone asking for download access.
She looked at Ken.  "Is that you?"
He nodded.  "It's the sequence for a new bug we encountered recently."
"Encountered where?"
"Nowhere local.  An isolated area."
"What, a lab?  A mountaintop?  The Mariana Trench?"
Ken didn't answer.  His data knocked patiently at Miri's front door.
Finally, Taka let it in.  "You think this is the same thing?" she asked as the system filtered it for nasties.
"It's possible."
"You had it all the while, and this is the first time you've shown it to me."
"This is the first time you had anything to compare it with."
"Sweet smoking Jesus, Ken.  You're not much of a team player, are you?"  At least it answered one question:  now she knew why these two had hung around for so long.
"It's not a counteragent,"  Laurie said, as if to gird her against inevitable disappointment.
Taka called up the new sequence.  "So I see."  She shook her head.  "It's not our mystery bug either."
"Really?"  Laurie looked surprised.  "You can tell that after five seconds?"
"It looks like ?ehemoth."
"It's not," Ken assured her.
"Maybe a new strain, then.  I'd have to grind through the whole sequence to be sure, but I can tell just by looking that it's an RNA bug."
"The biosol isn't?"
"I don't know what it is.  It's a nucleic acid of some kind, but the sugar's got a four-carbon ring.  I've never seen it before and it doesn't seem to be in any of Miri's cheat sheets.   I'm going to have to take it from scratch."
A look passed between Ken and Laurie.  It spoke volumes, but not to her.
"Don't let us stop you," Ken said.  

#

Miri could identify known diseases, and cure those for which cures had been found.  It could generate random variants of the usual targeted antibiotics, and prescribe regimens that might keep ahead of your average bug's ability to evolve countermeasures.  It could fix broken bones, excise tumors, and heal all manner of physical trauma.   When it came to ?ehemoth it was little more than a palliative center on wheels, of course, but even that was better than nothing.  All in all, the MI was a miracle of modern medical technology—but it was a field hospital, not a research lab.  It could sequence novel genomes, as long as the template was familiar, but that wasn't what it had been built for.
Genomes based on unfamiliar templates were another thing entirely.  This bug wasn't DNA or RNA—not even the primitive, barely-helical variant of RNA that ?ehemoth hung its hat on.  It was something else altogether, and Miri's database had never been designed to deal with anything like it.
Taka didn't give a damn.  She made it do that anyway.
She found the template easily enough once she looked beyond the nuts-and-bolts sequencing routines.  It was right there in a dusty corner of the biomed encyclopedia:  TNA.  A threose-based nucleic acid first synthesized back at the turn of the century.  The usual bases attached to a threose sugar-phosphate backbone, with phosphodiester binds connecting the nucleotides.  Some early theoretical work had suggested that it might have played a vital role back when life was still getting started, but everyone had pretty much forgotten about it after the Martian Panspermians won the day.
A novel template meant novel genes.  The standard reference database was virtually useless.  Decoding the new sequence with the tools in Miri's arsenal was like digging a tunnel with a teaspoon:  you could do it, but you had to be really motivated.  Fortunately Taka had motivation up to here.  She dug in, knowing it would just take time, and maybe a few unavoidable detours down blind alleys.
Too much time.  Way too many detours.  And what bugged Taka was, she knew the answer already.  She'd known almost before she'd started.  Every painstaking, laborious, mind-numbing test supported it.  Every electrophoretic band, every virtual blot, every PCR and TTD—all these haphazard techniques stapled together hour after bloody hour—they all pointed, glacially, implacably, to the same glorious answer.
And it was a glorious answer.  So after three days, tired of the endless triple-checks and replicates, she decided to just go with what she had.  She presented her findings near midday back at the cove,  for privacy and the convenience of a ready charge.
"It's not just a tweak job," she told the rifters.  A lone bedraggled gull picked its way among the stones.  "It's a totally artificial organism, designed from scratch.  And it was designed to outcompete ?ehemoth on its own turf.  It's got a TNA template, which is fairly primitive, but it also uses small RNA's in a way that ?ehemoth never did—that's an advanced trait, a eukaryotic trait.  It uses proline for catalysis.  A single amino acid doing the job of a whole enzyme—do you have any idea how much space that saves—?"
No.  They didn't.  The blank looks made that more than obvious.
She cut to the chase.  "The bottom line, my friends, is if you throw this little guy into culture with ?ehemoth it'll come out the winner every time."
"In culture," Ken repeated.
"No reason to think it won't do the same in the wild.  Remember, it was designed to make its own way in the world; the plan was obviously to just dump it into the system as an aerosol and leave it to its own devices."
Ken grunted, scrolling through Taka's results on the main display.  "What's this?"  
"What?  Oh, yeah.  It's polyploid."
"Polyploid?" Laurie repeated.
"You know, haploid, diploid, polyploid. Multiple sets of genes.  You mostly see it in some plants."
"Why here?" Ken wondered.  
"I found some nasty recessives,"  Taka admitted.  "Maybe they were deliberately inserted because of some positive effect they'd have in concert with other genes, or maybe it was a rush job so they just slipped through.  As far as I can tell the redundant genes were just layered on to eliminate any chance of homozygous expression."
He grunted.  "Not very elegant." 
Taka shook her head, impatient.  "Certainly it's a ham-fisted solution, but it's quick and—I mean, the point is it works!  We could beat ?ehemoth!"
"If you're right," Ken mused,  "it's not ?ehemoth you have to beat."
"The M&M's," Taka suggested.  
Something changed in Laurie's stance.
Ken looked unconvinced.  "Possibly.  Although the counterstrikes appear to originate with the North American defense shield."
"CSIRA," Laurie said quietly.
Ken shrugged.  "At this point, CSIRA effectively is the armed forces on this continent.  And there don't appear to be much in the way of centralized governments left to keep it in check."
"Shouldn't matter," Taka said.  "'Lawbreakers are incorruptible."
"Maybe they were, before Rio.  Now, who knows?"
"No."  Taka saw scorched landscapes.  She saw lifters on the horizon, breathing fire. "We take our orders from them.  We all—"
"Then it's probably just as well you kept this project so close to your chest,"  Lubin remarked.
"But why would anyone—" Laurie was looking from Taka to Ken, disbelief written across her face.  "I mean, what would be in it for them?"
More than confusion, Taka realized.  Loss, too.  Anguish.   Something clicked at the back of her mind:  Laurie hadn't really believed it, all this time.  She had helped where she could.  She had cared.  She had accepted Taka's interpretation of events—at least as a possibility—because it had offered her an opportunity to help set things right.  And yet, only now did she seem to realize what that interpretation entailed, the large-scale implications of what it was they were fighting:  not ?ehemoth after all, but their own kind.  
Odd, Taka reflected, how often it comes down to that...
It wasn't just the end of the world, not to Laurie.  It seemed somehow more—more intimate than that.  It was almost as if someone had betrayed her personally.  Welcome back, Taka thought to the vulnerable creature unmasked before her.  I've missed you.
"I don't know," she said at last.  "I don't know who would do this or why.  But the point is, now we stop it.  Now we culture these babies, and we send them out to do battle."  Taka pulled up the stats on her incubators. "I've already got five liters of the stuff ready to go, and I'll have twenty by morn..."
That's odd, she thought as a little flashing icon caught her eye for the first time.
That shouldn't—that looks like—
The bottom dropped out of her stomach.  "Oh, shit," she whispered.
"What?"  Ken and Laurie leaned in as one.
"My lab's online."  She stabbed at the icon; it blinked back at her, placidly unresponsive.  "My lab's online. It's uploading—God knows what it's—"
In an instant Ken was scrambling up the side of the van.  "Get the toolkit," he snapped, sliding across the roof towards a little satellite dish rising somehow from its recessed lair, pointing at the sky.
"What?  I—"
Laurie dove into the cab.  Ken yanked against the dish, breaking its fixation on some malign geosynchronous star.  Suddenly he cried out and thrashed, stopped himself just short of rolling off the roof.  His back was arched, his hands and head lifted away from the metal.
The dish stuttered back towards alignment, stripped gears whining.
"Fuck!"  Laurie tumbled out onto the pavement. The toolkit spilled its guts beside her.  She scrambled to her feet, yelled  "Shut it down, for Chrissakes!  The hull's electrified!"
Taka stumbled towards the open door.  She could see Ken wriggling back towards the dish on his back and elbows, using his diveskin as insulation.  As she ducked her head to hop past the trim—Thank God we disarmed the internals—a familiar hum started up deep in Miri's guts.
The weapons blister, deploying.
GPS was online.  She killed it.  It resurrected.  All external defenses were awake and hungry.  She called them off.  They ignored her.  Outside, Ken and Laurie shouted back and forth.
What do I do—what—
She scrambled under the dash and pulled open the fuse box. The circuit breakers were clunky manual things, unreachable to any demon built of electrons.  She pulled the plugs on security and comm and GPS.  She yanked autopilot too, just in case.
A chorus of electrical hums fell instantly silent around her.
Taka closed her eyes for a moment and allowed herself a deep breath.  Voices drifted through the open door as she pulled herself back up into the driver's seat.
"You okay?"
"Yeah.  Skin took most of the charge."
She knew what had happened.  What happened again, she corrected herself, grabbing the headset from its hook.
She was no coder.  She barely knew how to grow basic programs.  But she was a competent medical doctor, at least, and even bottom-half graduates knew their tools.  She'd spared the med systems from disconnection; now she brought up an architectural schematic and ran a count of the modules.
There were black boxes in there.  One of them, according to the icon, even had a direct user interface.  She tapped it.
The Madonna hung in front her, not speaking.  It's teeth were bared—a smile of some kind, full of hate and triumph.  Some distant, unimportant part of Taka Ouellette's mind wondered at what possible selective advantage an app could accrue by presenting itself in this way.  Did intimidation in the real world somehow increase fitness in the virtual one?
But a much bigger part of Taka's mind was occupied with something else entirely, something that had never really sunk in before:  this avatar had capped eyes.
They all did.  Every Lenie she'd ever encountered:  the faces changed from demon to demon, different lips, different cheeks and noses, different ethnicities.  But always centered on eyes as white and featureless as snowdrifts.
My name's Taka Ouellette, she had said an eternity ago.
And this strange cipher of a woman—who seemed to take the apocalypse so personally—  had replied Le— Laurie.
"Taka."
Taka started, but no—the Lenie wasn't talking to her.  This Lenie wasn't.
She slipped off the eyephones.  A woman in black with machinery in her chest and eyes like little glaciers looked in at her.  She didn't look anything like the creature in the wires.  No rage, no hate, no triumph.  Somehow, it was this expressionless, flesh-and-blood face that she would have associated with machinery.
"It was one of—it was a Le—a Madonna," Taka said.  "Inside the med system. I don't know how long it's been in there."
"We have to go," Laurie said.
"It was hiding in there.  Spying, I guess."  Taka shook her head.  "I didn't even know they could run silent like that, I thought they always just—automatically tore things apart every chance they got..."
"It got a signal out.  We've got to go before the lifters get here."
"Right.  Right."  Focus, Tak.  Worry about this later.
Ken was at Laurie's shoulder.  "You said you had five liters in culture.  We'll take some with us.  You disperse the rest.  Drive into town, ring your siren, give at least a few mils to anybody who qualifies, and get out.  We'll catch up with you later if we can.  You have the list?"
Taka nodded.  "There are only six locals with wheels.  Seven, if Ricketts is still around."
"Don't give it to anyone else," Ken said.  "People on foot aren't likely to get out of the burn zone in time.  I'd also advise you to avoid mentioning the lifters to anyone who doesn't have an immediate need to know."
She shook her head.  "They all need to know, Ken."
"People without transportation are liable to steal it from those who do.  I sympathize, but causing a panic could seriously compromise—"
"Forget it.  Everyone deserves a heads-up, at least.  If they can't outrun the flamethrowers, there are places to hide from them."
Ken sighed.  "Fine.  Just so you know the risks you're taking.  Saving a dozen lives here could doom a much greater number down the road."
Taka smiled, not entirely to herself.  "Weren't you the one who didn't think the greater number was worth saving in the first place?"
"It's not that," Laurie said.  "He just likes the idea of people dying."
Taka blinked, surprised.  Two faces looked back at her; she could read nothing in either.
"We have to hurry,"  Ken said.  "If they scramble from Montreal we can only count on an hour."
The onboard lab could dispense product either fore or aft.  Taka moved to the back of the MI and tapped instructions. "Lenie?"
"Ye—" Laurie began, and fell suddenly silent.
"No," Taka said quietly.  "I meant what about the Lenie?"
The other woman said nothing.  Her face was as blank as a mask.
Ken broke the silence:  "Are you certain it can't get out again?"
"I physically cut power to nav, comm, and GPS," Taka said, not taking her eyes off the woman in front of her.  "I pretty much lobotomized the old girl."
"Can it interfere with the culture process?"
"I wouldn't think so.  Not without being really obvious about it."
"You're not certain."
"Ken, right now I'm not certain about anything."  Although I'm approaching certainty about a thing or two...
"It's living where?  Reference and analytical?"
Taka nodded.  "The only systems with enough room."
"What happens if you shut them down?"
"The wet lab's on its own circuit.   The cultures should be okay as long as we don't need to do any more heavy-duty analysis on them."  
"Pull the plug," Ken said.
A heat-sealed sample bag, half-full of straw-colored liquid, slid from the dispensary and hung by its upper edge.  Taka tore it free and handed it over.  "Keep the diffusion disk uncovered or the culture will suffocate.  Other than that they should be okay for about a week, depending on the temperature.  Do you have a lab in your submarine?"
"Basic medbay," Lenie said.  "Nothing like this."
"We can improvise something," Lubin added.  "Can the diffuser handle seawater?"
"For a while.  Ninety minutes, tops."
"Okay.  Go."
Ken turned and started down the beach.
Taka raised her voice:  "What if—"
"We'll catch up with you afterwards," he said, not turning.
"I guess this is it, then,"  Taka said.  
Lenie, still beside her, tried on a smile.  It didn't seem to fit.
"How will you find me?" Taka asked her.  "I don't dare go online."
"Yeah.  Well."  The other woman took a step towards the water.  A swirl on that surface was all that remained of her partner.  "Ken's got a lot of tricks up his sleeve.  He'll track you down."
White eyes set into flesh and blood.  White eyes, sneering out from the circuitry of Miri's cortex.
White eyes bringing fire, and flood, and any number of catastrophes down on the innocent, all across North America.  All across the world, maybe.
Both sets of eyes called Lenie.
"You—"  Taka began.
Lenie, the Word Made Flesh, shook her head.  "Really.  We gotta go."
PARSIMONY
Achilles Desjardins was breeding exorcists when he learned he was a suspect.
It was a real balancing act.  If you made the little bastards immutable, they wouldn't adapt; even the vestigial wildlife hanging on in this pathetic corner of the net would chew them up and spit them out.  But if you set the genes free, provoked mutation with too many random seeds, then how could you be sure your app would still be on-mission a few generations down the road?  Natural selection would weed out any preprogrammed imperatives the moment they came into conflict with sheer self-interest.
Sometimes, if you didn't get the balance just right, your agent would forget all about its mission and join the other side.  And the other side didn't need any more help.  The Madonnas—or the Shredders, or the Goldfish, or any of the other whispered mythic names they'd acquired over the years—had already survived this gangrenous quagmire long past any reasonable expectation.  They shouldn't have; they'd codevolved to serve as little more than interfaces between the real world and the virtual one, mouthpieces for a superspecies assemblage that acted as a collective organism in its own right.  By rights they should have died in the crash that took out the rest of that collective, that took out ninety percent of all Maelstrom's wildlife—for how many faces make it on their own after the body behind is dead and gone?
But they had defied that logic, and survived.  They had changed—been changed— into something more, more self-sufficient.  Something purer.  Something that even Desjardins's exorcists could barely match.
They had been weaponised, the story went.  There was no shortage of suspects.  M&Ms and hobby terrorists and death-cult hackers could all be releasing them into the system faster than natural selection took them out, and there was a limit to what anyone could do without a reliable physical infrastructure.  The best troops in the world won't last a minute if you set them down in quicksand, and quicksand was all that N'Am had to offer these days:  a few hundred isolated fortresses hanging on by their fingernails, their inhabitants far too scared to go out and fix the fiberop.  The decaying electronic habitat wasn't much better for wildlife than it was for Human apps, but at a hundred gens-per-sec the wildlife still had the adaptive edge.
Fortunately, Desjardins had a knack for exorcism.  There were reasons for that, not all of them common knowledge, but the results were hard to argue with.  Even those ineffectual and self-righteous jerk-offs hiding out on the other side of the world gave him that much.  At least they all cheered him on, safe behind their barricades, whenever he released a new batch of countermeasures. 
But as it turned out, they were saying other things as well.
He wasn't privy to most of it—he wasn't supposed to be privy to any— but he was good enough to get the gist.  He had his own hounds on the trail, prowling comsats, sniffing random packets, ever-watchful for digital origami which might—when unscrambled and unfolded and pressed flat—contain the word Desjardins.
Apparently, people thought he was losing his edge.
He could live with that.  Nobody racks up a perfect score against the death throes of an entire planet, and if he'd dropped a few more balls than normal over the past months—well, his failure rate was still way below the pack average.  He outperformed any of those bozos who grumbled, however softly, during the teleconferences and debriefings and post-fiasco post-mortems that kept intruding on the war.  They all knew it, too; he'd have to slip a lot further than this before anyone else in the Patrol would be able to lay a hand on him.
Still.  There were hints of the wind, changing at his back.  Fragments of encrypted conversations between veterans in Helsinki and rookies in Melbourne and middle-management stats-hounds in New Delhi.  Disgruntled insistence from Weimers, King Sim himself, that there had to be some undiscovered variable wreaking havoc with his projections.  And—
And right this very second, a disembodied chunk of point-counterpoint snatched from the ether by one of Desjardins's minions.  It was only a few seconds in length—thanks to a filthy spectrum and the dynamic channel-switching that coped with it, it was almost impossible to grab more without knowing which random seed to apply—but it seemed to have been connecting a couple of 'lawbreakers in London and McMurdo.  It took forty seconds and six nested Bayesians to turn it back into English.
"Desjardins saved us from Rio," Mr. McMurdo had opined, moments earlier, in a Hindian accent.  "We'd have surely taken ten times the losses had he not acted when he did.  How those people threw off the Trip—"
Ms. London:  "How do you know they did?"  Irish lilt.  Enticing.
"Well let me see.  They launched an unprovoked attack on a large number of—"
"How do we know it was unprovoked?"
"Of course it was unprovoked."
"Why?  How do you know they didn't just see a threat to the greater good, and try to stop it?"
Precious moments of this fleeting excerpt, wasted on astonished silence.  Finally:  "Are you suggesting that—"
"I'm saying history gets written by the victors.  Rio's history.  How do we know the good guys won?"
End of intercept.  If McMurdo had had an answer, he hadn't got it out before the frequency skidded away.
Wow, Desjardins thought.
It was horseshit, of course.  The idea that twenty-one separate CSIRA franchises could have simultaneously gone rogue was hardly more plausible than the thought that Rio alone had.  Ms. London was a 'lawbreaker, not an idiot.  She knew about parsimony.  She'd just been blowing smoke out her ass, yanking poor old McMurdo's chain.
Still, it gave Desjardins pause.  He'd gotten used to being the Man Who Stopped Rio.  It put him above suspicion on so many counts.  And it didn't sit well, to think that there were people out there who could doubt his virtue even for a moment.
That could lead to second thoughts, he reflected.  It could lead to closer looks.
The board beeped again.  For a moment he thought that he'd beaten all odds and reacquired the signal—but no.  The new alert came from a different source entirely,  a broadband dump from somewhere in Maine.
That's odd, he thought.
A Lenie had gotten into a medical database and was spewing random intelligence across half the EM spectrum.  They did that a lot, these days—not content to merely scramble and hash, some had taken to shouting into the ether, indiscriminately dumping data into any network they could access.  Some reproductive subroutine, mutated to spread data instead of executables.  At the very least it threw more chaff into a system already losing usable bandwidth by the hour; at worst it could blow the lid off all sorts of secret and sensitive data.
Either way it was bad news for the real world; that would be enough to keep it going.
This particular demon had uploaded a whole shitload of biomedical stuff from the database it had plundered.  Desjardins's board had flagged it for potential epidemiological significance.  He popped the lid and looked inside.
And immediately forgot about any trivial bullshit gossip from London.
There were two items, both rife with dangerous pathology.  Desjardins was no pathologist, but then again he didn't have to be; the friends and advisors arrayed about him distilled all those biochemical details down to an executive summary that even he could understand.  Now they served up a pair of genotypes with red flags attached.  The first was almost ?ehemoth, only better:  greater resistance to osmotic stress, sharper teeth for cleaving molecules.  Higher virulence.  At least one critical feature was the same, though.  Like baseline ?ehemoth, this new strain was optimized for life at the bottom of the sea.
It did not exist in the standard database.  Which raised the question of what its technical specs were doing in a glorified ambulance out of Bangor.
It would have been enough to grab his attention even if it had arrived unaccompanied.  It had brought a date, though, and she was the real ballbreaker.  She was the bitch he had always dreaded.  She was a complete surprise.
Because he had always known that Seppuku would gain a foothold eventually.
But he hadn't expected anyone on his own side to be culturing the damn thing.  
CORRAL
Taka cursed her own lack of foresight.  They'd spread the word, all right.  They'd told all who came by of their plan to save the world:  the need for samples, the dangers of lingering afterwards,  the places she'd patrol to take charge of vital payloads.  They'd taken special note of those few who'd driven up in cars or motorbikes or even plain old pedal-powered flywheels, got addresses from those who still had them and told the rest to check back regularly:  if all went well, they might save the world.
And things had gone well, and then so horribly wrong, in such quick succession.  They had their counteragent, or some of it anyway, but no prearranged signals to bring in the couriers.  And after all, why would they have even bothered?  They could have taken an afternoon and driven around the county.  They could have waited for those of no fixed address to check in, tomorrow or the next day.
And now Taka Ouellette had the salvation of the world in her hands, and some shrinking fraction of a sixty-minute window to get it to safety.
She ran the siren continuously from one end of Freeport to the other, a shrieking departure from the music employed to announce her day-to-day presence.  Hopefully it would summon the healthy as well as the sick.
She got some of both.  She warned them all to take shelter; she promised a mother with a broken arm and a son with incipient stage-one that she'd come back and help them when the fires had passed.  She urged the others, as they fled, to send the Six her way, or anyone else with wheels to burn.
After thirty minutes, one of them came by.  After forty, two more; she loaded them all with precious milliliters of amber fluid and sent them running.  She begged them to send the others, if they knew their whereabouts.  If they could find them in time.
Forty-five minutes, and nothing but a ragged handful of the hungry and the feeble.  She chased them away with stories about fire-breathing dragons, sent them down to a fisherman's wharf that had once been the community's breadbasket.  Now, if they were lucky, it might at least serve as a place from which to jump into the ocean; surely the flames wouldn't scorch the whole Atlantic?
Fifty minutes.
I can't wait.
But there were others here, she knew.  People she hadn't seen today.  People she hadn't warned.
And they're not coming, Tak.  If you want to warn them, you might as well start going door to door.  Search every house and hovel within twenty klicks.  You've got ten minutes.
Ken had said they could count on sixty minutes.  A minimum estimate, right?  It might take longer, a lot longer.
She knew what Dave would have said.  She still had two liters of culture.  Dave would have told her she could make all the difference, if she didn't just sit there and wait for the furnace.
It might not happen at all.  What were they basing this on, anyway?  A couple of firestorms that happened to follow aborted missile attacks?  What about the times when the missiles fell and nothing happened afterwards?  There had to be times when nothing had happened.  What about the times when the fires came, or the floods or the explosions, with nothing to presage them?  Correlation wasn't causation...and this wasn't even strong correlation...
It convinced Ken.
But she didn't know Ken at all.  Didn't even know his last name, or Laur—Lenie's.  She would have had nothing but their own word that they were who they said they were, if they had even bothered to really tell her even that much.  And now even their names were suspect.  Laurie was not Laurie at all, it seemed.  
Taka only had their word on the things they had said, her own speculation on all the things they hadn't, and the disturbing similarities between this amphibious woman and the demons in the net...
Fifty-five minutes.
Go.  You've done all you can here.  Go.
She started the engine.
Committed, she didn't look back.  She drove down the decaying asphalt as fast as she could without risking some pothole-induced rollover.  Her fear seemed to increase in lockstep with her velocity—as though the diffuse and overgrown remains of Freeport and its pathetic, half-starved inhabitants had somehow numbed her own instinct for self-preservation.  Now, abandoning them, her heart rose in her mouth.  She imagined the crackle of flames advancing along the road behind her.  She fought the road; she fought panic.
You're going south, you idiot!  We were south when the signal went out, south is where they'll start— 
She screeched east onto Sherbourne.  Miri took the bend on two wheels.  A great shadow fell across the road before her, the sky darkened abruptly overhead.  Her imagination saw great airships, spewing fire—but her eyes (when she dared to look away from the road) saw only overarching trees, brownish-green blurs streaking the world on both sides,  leaning over and blocking the afternoon sun.
But no, that's the sun up ahead, setting.
It was a great yellow-orange blob, dimmed by its slanting angle through the atmosphere.  It was centered in the bright archway that marked the end of the tunnel of trees.  It was setting directly over the road ahead.
How can it be so late?  It can't be so late, it's only aftern—
The sun was setting.
The sun was setting the trees on fire.
She hit the brakes.  The shoulder strap caught her around the chest, threw her back into her seat.  The world grew ominously quiet:  no more spitting clatter of rock against undercarriage,  no more rattling of equipment on hooks, banging against Miri's walls.  There was only the distant, unmistakable crackling of flame from up ahead.
A containment perimeter.  They'd started at the outside and moved in.
She threw the MI into reverse and yanked hard on the stick.  The vehicle skidded back and sideways, slewing into the ditch.  Forward again.  Back the way she'd come.  The tires spun in the soft, muddy embankment.
A whooshing sound, from overhead, like the explosive breath of a great whale she'd heard in the archives as a child.  A sheet of flame flooded the road, blocking her escape.  Heat radiated through the windshield.
Oh Jesus.  Oh God.
She opened the door.  Scorched air blasted her face.  The seatbelt held her fast.  Panicky fingers took way too long to set her free and then she was on the ground, rolling.  She scrambled to her feet, bracing against Miri's side; the plastic burned her hands. 
A wall of flame writhed barely ten meters away.  Another—the one she'd mistaken for the setting sun—was further off, maybe sixty meters on the other side of the MI.  She sheltered on the cooler side of the vehicle.  Better.  But it wouldn't last.
Get the culture.
A mechanical groan, the bone-deep sound of twisting metal.  She looked up:  directly overhead, through a mosaic of leaves and branches not yet burning, she saw the fractured silhouette of a great swollen disk wallowing in the sky.
Get the culture!
The road was blocked ahead and behind.  Miri would never be able to push through the dying woodlands to either side, but Taka could run for it.  Every instinct, every nerve was telling her to run for it.
The culture!  MOVE!
She yanked open the passenger door and climbed over the seat.  The icons blinking on the cab's rear wall seemed almost deliberately slow to respond.  A little histogram appeared on the board.  It rose as slowly as a tide.
Whoosh.
The forest across the road burst into flame.
Three sides gone now, one way left, one way.  Oh Jesus.
The histogram blinked and vanished.  The panel extruded a sample bag, swollen with culture.  Taka grabbed it and ran.
Whoosh.
Flame ahead of her, pouring from the heavens like a liquid curtain.
Flame on all sides, now.
Taka Ouellette stared into the firestorm for some endless, irrelevant span of seconds.  Then she sank to the ground with a sigh.  Her knees made indentations in the softening asphalt.  The heat of the road burned her flesh.  Her flesh was indifferent.  She noted, vaguely surprised, that her face and hands were dry; the heat baked the sweat from her pores before it even had the chance to wet her skin.  It was an interesting phenomenon.  She wondered if anyone had ever written it up.
It didn't really matter, though.
Nothing did.
TURNCOAT
"That's odd," said Lenie Clarke.
The periscope had backed off from shore a ways, to get a better northwest view over the trees.  The image it conveyed was surprisingly bucolic.  It was too far to see Freeport from here—and Freeport's dwellings and businesses had been spread far too widely to present anything approaching a skyline even in the old days— but they should have seen lifters, at least.  They should have seen the flames or the smoke by now.
"It's been three hours," Clarke said, glancing across the cockpit.  "Maybe you stopped the signal after all."  Or maybe, she mused, we're completely off-base about this whole thing. 
Lubin slid one finger a few millimeters along the panel.  The 'scope's-eye view panned left.
"Maybe she made it," Clarke remarked.  Such dull, lifeless words for all the meaning they conveyed:  Maybe she saved the world.
Maybe she saved me.
"I don't think so," Lubin said.
A pillar of smoke boiled up from behind the crest of a hill, staining the sky brown.
She felt a tightness in her throat.  "Where is that?" she asked.
"Dead west," Lubin replied.

#

They came ashore on the south side of the cove, a slope of smooth stones and gnarled driftwood growing slimy with ?ehemoth.  They followed the sun along a dirt road that had never seen so much as a signpost.   The pillar of smoke led them on like a pole star with a half-life, thinning in the sky as they tracked it across paved roads and gravel ones, over the crest of a weathered bump called Snake Hill  (judging by the name of the road that ran along its base), on into the setting sun itself.   Moments into twilight Lubin stopped, one hand raised in warning.
By now the once-billowing column was all but exhausted, a few threads of smoke twisting into the sky.  But they could see the source, a roughly rectangular patch of scorched woodland at the bottom of the hill.  Or rather, a roughly rectangular outline:  the center of the area appeared to be unburned.
Lubin had his binocs out.  "See anything?" Clarke asked.
He hmmmed.
"Come on, Ken.  What is it?"
He handed her the binoculars without a word.
There was disquieting moment when the device tightened itself around her head.  Suddenly the world was huge, and in sharp focus.  Clarke felt brief vertigo and stepped forward, bracing against sudden illusory imbalance.  Twigs and blighted leaves the size of dinner tables swept past in a blur.  She zoomed back to get her bearings.   Better: there was the scorched earth, there was the patch in its midst, and there was—
"Oh shit," she murmured.
Miri sat dead center of the clear zone.  It looked undamaged.
Ouellette stood beside it.  She appeared to be conversing with a gunmetal ovoid half her size, hovering a meter over her head.  Its carapace was featureless; its plastron bristled with sensors and antennae. 
A botfly.  Not so long ago, teleoperated robots just like it had hounded Lenie Clarke across a whole continent.
"Busted," Lubin said.

#

The world was bleaching in Clarke's eyecaps by the time they reached the MI.  Ouellette sat on the road with her back against the van, legs bent, arms crossed loosely over knees.  She stared listlessly at the pavement between her feet.  She looked up at the sound of their approach. The botfly hung overhead like a bodyguard.  It showed no visible reaction to their arrival.
Bleached light wasn't enough to account for the pallor of Ouellette's face.  She looked absolutely bloodless.  There were wet streaks on her face.
She looked at Clarke and shook her head.  "What are you?" she said.  Her voice was as empty as a cave.
Clarke's throat went dry.
"You're not just some refugee.   You're not just some rifter who's been hiding for five years.  You—you started this, somehow.  You started it all..."
Clarke tried to swallow, looked to Lubin.  But Lubin's eyes didn't waver from the botfly.
She spread her hands.  "Tak, I—"
"The monsters in the machines, they're all—you,"  Ouellette seemed stunned at the sheer magnitude of Clarke's betrayal.  "The M&Ms and the fanatics and the death cults, they're all following you..."
They're not, Clarke wanted to shout.  I'd stop them all in a second if I could, I don't know how any of it got started—
But that would be a lie, of course.  Maybe she hadn't formally founded the movements that had sprung up in her wake, but that didn't make them any less faithful to the thing she'd been.  They were the very essence of the rage and hatred that had driven her, the utter indifference to any loss but her own.
They hadn't done it for her, of course.  The seething millions had their own reasons for anger, vendettas far more righteous than the false pretenses on which Lenie Clarke had waged war.  But she had shown them the way.  She had proven it was possible.  And with every drop of her blood that she spilled, every precious inoculation of ?ehemoth into the world, she had given them their weapons.
Now there was nothing she could bring herself to say.  She could only shake her head, and force herself to meet the eyes of this accuser and one-time friend.
"And now they've really outdone themselves,"  Ouellette continued in her broken, empty voice.  "Now, they've—" 
She took a breath.
"Oh God," she finished.  "I fucked up so bad."
Like a marionette she pulled herself to her feet.  Still the botfly didn't move.
"It wasn't a counteragent," Ouellette said.  
This time, Lubin spared a glance. "What do you mean?"
"I guess we're not dying fast enough.  The witch was beating us but we were slowing it down at least, we lost four people for every one we saved but at least we were saving some.  But the M&M's don't get into paradise until we're all dead, so they came up with something better..."
"And they are?" Lubin asked, turning back to the teleop.
"Don't look at me," the machine said quietly.  "I'm one of the good guys."
Clarke recognized the voice in an instant.  
So did Lubin.  "Desjardins."
"Ken. Old buddy."  The botfly bobbed a few centimeters in salute.  "Glad you remember me."
You're alive, Clarke thought.  After Rio, after Sudbury going dark, after five years. You're alive.  You're alive after all.
My friend....
Ouellette watched the proceedings with numb amazement on her face.  "You know—"
"He—helped us out," Clarke told her.  "A long time ago."
"We thought you were dead," Lubin said.
"Likewise.  It's been pretty much seven seconds to sockeye ever since Rio, and the only times I had a chance to ping you you'd gone dark.  I figured you'd been done in by some disgruntled faction who never made the cut.  Still.  Here you are."
My friend, Clarke thought again.  He'd been that when even Ken Lubin had been trying to kill her.  He'd risked his life for her before they'd even met.  By that measure, although their paths had only crossed briefly, he was the best friend she'd ever had.  
She had grieved at word of his death; by rights, now, she should be overjoyed.  But one word looped endlessly through her mind, subverting joy with apprehension.
Spartacus.
"So," she said carefully.  "You're still a lawbreaker?"
"Fighting Entropy for the Greater Good," the botfly recited.
"And that includes burning thousands of hectares down to the bedrock?" Lubin queried.
The botfly descended to Lubin-eye level and stared lens to lens.  "If killing ten saves a thousand it's a deal, Ken, and nobody knows that better than you..  Maybe you didn't hear what our lovely friend just told you, but there's a war on.  The bad guys keep lobbing Seppuku into my court and I've been doing my damndest to keep it from getting a foothold.  I've got barely any staff and the infrastructure's falling apart around my ears but I was managing, Ken, I really was.  And then, as I understand it, you two walked into poor Taka's life and now at least three vectors have snuck past the barricades."
Lubin turned to Ouellette.  "Is this true?"
She nodded.  "I checked it myself, when he told me what to look for.  It was subtle, but it was...right there.  Chaperone proteins and alternative splicing, RNA interference.  A bunch of second and third-order effects I never saw.  They were all tangled up in the polyploid genes, and I just didn't look hard enough.  It gets inside you.  It kills ?ehemoth sure enough, but then it just keeps going and it—I didn't see it.  I was so sure I knew what it was, and I just—fucked up."  She stared at the ground, away from accusing eyes.  "I fucked up again," she whispered.
Lubin said nothing for a few seconds.  Then, to the 'fly:  "You understand that there are reasons for caution here."
"You don't trust me."  Desjardins sounded almost amused.  "I'm not the one with the compulsive murder fetish, Ken.  And I'm not the only one who shook off the Trip.  Are you really in a position to throw stones?"
Ouellette looked up, startled from her bout of self-loathing.
"And whatever misgivings you have," the 'lawbreaker continued, "Give me credit for a little self-interest.  I don't want Seppuku in my back yard any more than you do.  I'm just as vulnerable as the rest of you."
"How vulnerable is that?"  Lubin wondered.  "Taka?"
"I don't know," Ouellette whispered.  "I don't know anything..."
"Guess."
She closed her eyes.  "It's a whole different bug than ?ehemoth, but it's designed—I think it's designed for the same niche.  So being tweaked against ?ehemoth won't save you, but it might buy you some time."
"How much?"
"I can't even guess.  But everyone else, you know—I'd guess, most anyone who hasn't got the retrofits...symptoms after three or four days, death within fourteen."
"Dead slow," Lubin remarked.  "Any decent  necrotising strep would kill you in three hours."
"Yes.  Before you had a chance to spread it." Ouellette's voice was hollow.  "They're smarter than that."
"Mmm.  Mortality rate?"
The doctor shook her head.  "It's designed, Ken.  There's no natural immunity."
The muscles tightened around Lubin's mouth.
"It actually gets worse," Desjardins added.  "I'm not the only watchdog on this beat.  There are still a few others in N'Am, and a lot more overseas.  And I've got to tell you, my limited-containment strategy is not all that popular.  There are people who'd just as soon nuke the whole bloody seaboard just to be on the safe side."
"Why don't they nuke whoever's launching Seppuku?" Lubin wondered.
"Try getting a fix on half a dozen submerged platforms moving around the deep Atlantic at sixty knots.  Truth be told, some thought it was you guys."
"It's not."
"Doesn't matter. People are itching to go nuclear on this.  I've only been able to hold them off because I could keep Seppuku from spreading without resorting to fissiles.  But now, r's and K's, you've handed the nuclear lobby everything they need.  If I were you I'd start digging fallout shelters.  Deep ones."
"No." Clarke shook her head.  "There were only, what, six people with wheels?"
"Only three showed up," Ouellette said.  "But they could be anywhere.  They didn't leave me an itinerary. And they'll be spreading the stuff.  They'll be seeding it in ponds and fields and—"
"If we can catch up with them, we can backtrack," Lubin pointed out.
"But we don't even know where they were headed!  How can we—"
"I don't know how."  The botfly wiggled on its ground-effectors, a tiny flourish.  "But you better get started.  You have made one industrial-strength tar pit of a mess here, folks.  And if you want to stand even a one-in-fifty chance of keeping this place from melting down to radioactive glass, you are damn well gonna help clean it up."
There was a silence.  Stubborn flames crackled and spat faintly in the distance.
"We're going to help you," Lubin said at last.
"Well, you can all do your bit, of course," Desjardins replied, "but it's your efforts in particular, Ken, that are gonna come in most handy right now."
Lubin pursed his lips.  "Thanks, but I'll pass.  I wouldn't do you much good."
Clarke bit her tongue.  He's got to be working some kind of angle.
The botfly hovered for a moment, as if considering.  "I haven't forgotten your skill set, Ken.  I've experienced it first-hand."
"I haven't forgotten yours either.  You could mobilize the whole hemisphere in thirty seconds flat."
"A lot's changed since you retired, friend.  And in case you haven't noticed, there's not much left of the hemisphere even if I did still have all my super powers."
Ouellette's eyes flickered between man and machine, watching the point-counterpoint with a mixture of outrage and confusion.  But at least she, too, seemed to know enough to keep her mouth shut.
Lubin glanced around at the charred and darkling landscape.  "Your resources seem more than sufficient.  You don't need me."
"You're not listening, Ken.  A lot has changed.  A lifter or two is nothing, it's background noise.  But you start mobilizing too many resources at once, the wrong kind of people pay attention.  And not everybody on this side is on this side, if you know what I mean." 
He's talking about other lawbreakers, Clarke realized.  Maybe it's Spartacus vs. the Trip.  Or maybe all of them are off the leash by now.
"You'd rather keep a low profile," Lubin surmised.
"I've always preferred subtlety.  And your rather blunt social skills notwithstanding, when it comes right down to it even you're more subtle than a fleet of fire-breathing killer blimps."
When it comes down to war, he means.  Private war of the psychos, by invitation only.  Clarke  wondered how many sides there were.  Could they even have sides?  How do you form an alliance with someone you know will stab you in the back the first chance they get?  Maybe it's just every sociopath for himself, she mused.
Then again, it wasn't Lubin who'd had difficulty choosing sides recently.
"I'm otherwise engaged," Lubin said.
"Naturally.  You'd have to have a damn good reason to come all the way back here.  The Mid Atlantic Ridge isn't exactly in the neighborhood."
"It might be before too long, judging by the recent traffic."
"Ah.  Somebody pay you a visit?"
"Not yet.  But they're sniffing around close by.  It's an unlikely coincidence."
"Don't look at me, Ken.  If I'd spilled the beans, they wouldn't have to sniff around."
"I'm aware of that."
"Still, you naturally want to know who's on the trail.  Ken, I'm hurt.  Why didn't you come to me at—oh, right.  You thought I was dead."  Desjardins paused, then added, "You're really lucky I came along."
"I'm even luckier," Lubin said, "that you need my help."
The botfly bobbled in a sudden gust of hot wind. "Okay then.  You help me keep N'Am from dying a little while longer, and I'll try and find out who's stalking you.  Deal?"
Lubin considered.
"Seems fair," he said.
CRASH
The Crusade, thought Lenie Clarke, could go on without her.
It wasn't as though it needed her services.  Saving lives and ending them were the only two causes worth pursuing now, and she had no great skill in either.  Of course that wasn't exactly true, she realized even as the thought occurred.  When it came to total kills, there wasn't a person on the planet who could match her score.  But those deaths had been indiscriminate and untargeted, faceless collateral she'd barely spared a thought for.  Right now, the greater good needed something considerably more precise:  specific individuals, not whole populations.  Isolated faces to be hunted down and—what was the word Rowan had used?—decirculated.
It didn't have to be a euphemism.  There'd be no reason to kill the vectors once they'd been found, even assuming that Seppuku hadn't killed them first.  There were only three of them after all, with less than a day's head start in a place where people were no longer a major part of the landscape.  It was quite possible they'd be found before they could infect too many others, before uneconomies of scale made wholesale extermination the only viable option.  Ten thousand carriers might have to be burned for want of facilities to contain them; but ten could be taken alive, isolated and cared for, their condition studied in hopes of finding a cure.  There'd be no need for outright murder.
I'm not the one with the compulsive murder fetish, Ken.
Either way, it didn't matter.  Soon Lubin would be on the hunt, backed up by all the resources Desjardins could provide; and whether he was in it for the kill or the thrill of the chase, Clarke's presence at his side would only slow him down.  Taka Ouellette had already gone on to better things, whisked away to a CSIRA facility where, as Desjardins had put it, "your skill set can be much better utilized".  She had left with barely another word or a glance at Lenie Clarke.  Now she was probably sitting at the end of a line that would start with Lubin, waiting to process the people he tracked down.  There was no point along that short route where Lenie Clarke could be useful.
She couldn't save, and she couldn't kill.  Here, though, in the broken shells of Freeport, she could do something in between.  She could delay.  She could hold the fort.  She could keep people from dying of tumors or broken bones, so that ?ehemoth and Seppuku could take a crack at them instead.
Lubin did her one last favor before leaving.  He navigated through the virtual lightscape of Miri's neocortex, found the infestation that had betrayed them, and isolated it.  It was too insidious, too deeply dug-in to trust to mere deletion; there were too many places it could be hiding, too many ways to subvert the search protocols.  The only way to be sure it was gone was to physically throw out the memory with the monster.
Crouched over the dashboard, Lubin read reams of diagnostic arcana and called instructions over his shoulder.  Behind him, Clarke—up to her elbows in crystals and circuitry—did the actual cutting. Lubin told her which card to extract; she did so.  He told her which array to peel from its surface, using a tri-pronged tool with delicate whisker-thin fingers.  She obeyed.  She waited while he ran checks and double-checks on the rest of the system, reseated the lobotomized unit at his command, poised herself to yank it again should any remnant of the monster have somehow escaped containment.  Satisfied at last that Miri was clean, Lubin told Clarke to lock and reboot.  She did it without question.
He never told her outright to destroy the infected component.  That was just too obvious a measure to mention.

#

It was, after all, a part of her.
She didn't know how, exactly; the perverse logic that had spawned and twisted these electronic demons was something better left to hackers and evolutionary ecologists.   But back at the beginning, she'd been the template.  This thing had taken its lead from her; it was a reflection, however perverse, of Lenie Clarke.  And irrational though it seemed, she couldn't shake the sense that it still owed something of itself to the flesh and blood it was modeled after.  She had raged, and hated, for so very long; perhaps these reflections weren't so distorted after all. 
She resolved to find out.
She was no codemeister.  She knew nothing about growing programs or pruning software to specs.  She did, however, know how to snap prefab components together, and Phocoena's lockers and glove compartments were overflowing with the legacy of five years' service.  The little sub had carried a thousand survey instruments to Impossible Lake, served in the repair and maintenance of them all.  It had slipped across thermoclines and through Langmuir Cells, seeding drogues and TDRs into the water column.  It had spied on corpses and moved supplies and served as a general workhorse far beyond anything its designers had ever intended.  After five years, it had accumulated more than enough building blocks for Lenie Clarke to play with.
She found a Cohen board in the bottom of a drawer, plugged a battery onto one of its sockets and a generic OS chip onto another.  A tracery of whisker-thin filaments flickered briefly between the new components as the board's autodiscovery routines sniffed them out and made introductions.  She had to look a little harder for a user interface; she couldn't risk a wireless hookup.  Finally she found an old fiberop headset with an integrated infrared keyboard, and plugged it in.  More flickering handshakes.  
She slid on the headset.  A pastel keyboard hovered in the air before her.  She reached out; the headset's infrared eyes watched her hands move in empty space, mapped real fingers onto illusory controls.  She brought up a map of the Cohen board, built a fence around a handful of empty sockets, cut a single gateway and locked it tight from the outside.  She assigned a panic button, just in case:  it floated off to one side, an orange spark in virtual space.  There would be no need to reach out and touch it.  Merely focusing her eyes on that icon would freeze the system solid.  But the safeguard had a price attached.  The headset couldn't see through photocollagen.  Her eyes would have to be stripped naked during the encounter.    
She doffed the headset and regarded her handiwork in the real world:  two miniscule Platonic solids and a thread of fiberop rising from a dimpled grid of empty pinhead sockets.  A sparse right-angle spiderweb of emerald threads connected the plug-ins.  Beside it, a glowing crimson border enclosed a rectangular patch of unoccupied terrain.
It was completely self-contained and utterly isolated.  There were no antennae, no wireless interfaces, nothing that could send a signal from that landscape to any other.  Nothing plugged into the board would be able to get off of it.
She regarded the infected and excised lobe of Miri's brain: a Lilliputian necklace of  OPMs and memory chips lying isolated and inert in the palm of her hand.  For all Clarke knew there was nothing left inside; the memory was nonvolatile, but who knew what damage had been inflicted during the exorcism?  She remembered her challenge to Ken Lubin—how do you know I can't wake the fucker with a kiss?—but she had no idea how to actually do that.  She'd kept these components  only because she could not throw them away.  And because she hoped that if she spoke to the thing inside, it might speak back.
She lifted the necklace with a pair of force-feedback tweezers whose touch was as fine as eyelashes.  She seated it into the center of the red zone.  Green threads sprouted from the other components and converged just outside the gate, and stopped.
She donned the headset.  She took a breath.
She opened the gate.

#

An explosion of pixels, right in front of her.  Anger and ravenous hunger and bared teeth, furious input that bypassed the upper brain entirely and plunged icy needles right into the brainstem.  
"Let—"
The flight response took over before she'd even parsed what she'd seen; the orange panic-button flared in her sights.  The image froze.
She realized she was gasping.  She forced herself to calm down.
A motionless face, black and green and radiant.  A furious portrait of inverted flesh-tones.  It didn't look like her at all.  Except for the eyes:  those empty, raging eyes.
And not even those, she remembered after a moment.  Because her eyes were uncapped, now.  She faced this radioactive doppelganger completely naked.
Is this what I was?
She took a breath, held it briefly, let it out.  She focused on the panic button and released it.
"—me out!" the apparition screamed.
Clarke shook her head.  "There's nowhere for you to go."
"Let me out or I'll grind every fucking address in here to pulp!"
"Answer some questions first."
"Answer this, you worm-riddled twat."
The universe flickered and went out.
Nothing but her own rapid breathing and the quiet hiss of Phocoena's air conditioner.  After a moment, her headset etched a message across the void:

SYSTEM CRASH.  RESTART?
Y	N

Clarke tried again.
"Let me out!"
She shook her head.  "Tell me what you want."
"What do you want?"  The question seemed to calm the monster down a bit.  It even smiled.  "You don't want to fuck with me, friend.  I've killed more people than you can count."
"Why?  Revenge?  For the GA?  For—for Daddy, for what he did while mom was—how could you care about that?  How could you even know?"
The face desaturated, its black-light pigments fading as if in twilight.  In moments it was blacks and grays and two angry, crystalline ovals of pure white. 
"Are you trying to kill everyone?" Clarke asked softly.  "Are you trying to kill yourself?"
It glared at her and spat, "Kill yourself? You—"
Dark, and void, and SYSTEM CRASH.
And the next time.
And the next.
THE SKILL OF THE CHASE
A CSIRA drone, floating like thistledown just below the jet stream, caught the heat trace at 0300.  It was warming Service Road 23 northeast of Skowhagen, and it shared certain characteristics with another source— two hours older— that had been glimpsed by a lifter shipping medical supplies out of Portland.  Resupply hauls weren't normally charged with surveillance, but everyone was on alert since the word had come down from Sudbury.
Both signatures matched the emissions put out by a brand of hydrogen cell that hadn't been manufactured since 2044.  Someone was driving the shit out of an old Ford Fugitive, traveling inland along back roads in the middle of the night.  
One of Ouellette's vectors had driven a Fugitive.  Lubin caught up with her somewhere on the far side of the New Hampshire border.
Desjardins had requisitioned him an ultralight.  It wasn't as fast as ground-effect transport, but it could go higher and it drank fewer Joules than a chopper.  Lubin was cruising west at about two hundred meters when the Ford bounced sunlight into his eye.  It was parked on the edge of an acid-washed bog full of rusty tannins and jagged waterlogged stumps.  The wetland seemed to have grown since Highway Maintenance had given up on the neighborhood; a tongue of dark water lapped across a few meters of low-lying asphalt just ahead of the vehicle.
That wasn't what had stopped it, though.
Lubin landed fifty meters up the road and approached from behind.  His inlays performed the usual schematic vivisection as he drew near, cluttered up his vision with icons and wiring diagrams.  His gut rebelled at the mere thought of tuning out usable intel from any source, but sometimes it distracted more than it informed.  He really didn't need to know about the corroded anode in the Honda's fuel cell.  He shut down the display in his head.  The  Fugitive dropped back into the real world, seemed to flatten somehow, luminous guts vanishing behind dirty plastic skin.
A blonde mocha woman sat in the driver's seat, forehead against the wheel, long straight hair obscuring her face.  She seemed oblivious to his approach.
He tapped on the window.  She turned apathetically at the sound.  He knew immediately that something was wrong:  her face was flushed and shiny with perspiration.
She knew something was wrong, too.  Lubin's isolation skin would have pretty much given that away even if she hadn't been sick.
Three days, he thought.
The door was unlocked.  He pulled it open and stepped back.
"They told us...it was a cure," she said.  It took her two breaths.
"Do you have any culture left?"  Lubin asked.
She gulped.  "Some.  Spread most of it around."  She shook her head.  "Gave some to Aaron, too.  Couple of days ago."
A transparent bladder lay on the seat beside her.  It had been drained almost flat.  The culture that remained, sucked into creases and wrinkles in the deflated bag, was no longer amber in color; it was dark and gray as anoxic mud.
"What happened to it?" he asked.
"I don't know.  Changed."  She shook her head tiredly.  "She said it would last a week..."
He leaned forward.  She still had the presence of mind to look vaguely startled when she saw him up close.  "You were one of them.  You were one of them.  I saw you there..."
"I need to know where you seeded it," he said.  "I need to know everyone you've been in contact with since Freeport, and how to get in touch with them."
She held up one limp-wristed arm, showing off her wristwatch.  "Aaron's in here.  We split up.  Thought...we'd cover more ground..."
He took the watch.  Its phone feature wasn't much use without the earbud, but he could deal with Aaron later.
"I was talking to him just this morning," the woman managed.  "He's not—not doing too well himself."
He circled the Fugitive and climbed in the passenger's side.  Nav was offline—a precaution left over from the previous week, when the ether had been enemy territory.  He brought up dashboard GPS and scaled the map to include the coast.
"Everywhere you stopped," he said.  "Everyone you met."
"I'm sick," she sighed.
"I can get you to a hospital.  A real hospital," he promised, sweetening the pot.  "But you have to help me first."
She told him what she could.  Finally he climbed back into sunshine and headed for the ultralight.  Halfway there he paused and looked back.
She could make a run for it, he thought.  She's not too sick to drive.  She could try to escape.
Or, eyeing the stained water by the road,  she could just lurch into the water and infect the whole bog.  Much more difficult to contain after that.
Maybe she's a loose end.
Idle musing, of course.  There was no immediate threat here, nothing that could justify extreme prejudice.  Not that that was always likely to be the case, the way this thing was spreading.  This was the second vector Lubin had tracked down, and the first of Ouellette's original trio.  The other had been a secondary who'd picked up the baton in her wake, and he'd admitted to seeding still others.  How far the other two Patient Zeroes had run was still anyone's guess.  And now there was Aaron to deal with, not to mention the half-dozen places where this woman had dribbled little aliquots of Seppuku in her wake... 
He could afford to wait, he told himself.  The way things were going, he'd have all the excuse he needed before long.  Not that he needed excuses any more, of course.  Ken Lubin had been a free agent for years.
Play nice, he told himself.  Play by the rules.
He did.  He called the ambulance before he called the flamethrowers, stood guard until it floated in from the west, sprayed himself down and climbed back into the sky.  He banked southeast, backtracking the vector's route.  A lifter appeared in the middle distance and paced him for a while, cruising like a great dark cloud towards the target areas he'd pinpointed.  Pilot lights sparked faintly at the tips of the long, incendiary muzzles hanging from its underbelly.  Puffy pink and green clouds erupted intermittently in the airspace beneath it, cotton-candy litmus tests sniffing out infection.
He edged up the throttle.  By now, Aaron's partner would be bagged and on her way.  Taka Ouellette would be running tests on her by nightfall.
If Ouellette was running tests on anything, of course.  Lubin had his doubts.
He remembered the first time he had met Achilles Desjardins.  He had broken into the 'lawbreaker's home in search of information that only Desjardins could provide, and had caught him in flagrante delecto with a VR sensorium that served up wraparound scenarios of sexual torture.  Desjardins would have never inflicted those impulses on the real world back then, of course, but a lot of things had changed in the meantime.  Rules had changed.  Leashes had been slipped.  Official hierarchies had crumbled, leaving those who wielded power miraculously free of oversight. 
Lubin had eavesdropped briefly on Desjardins's fantasy life before getting down to business.  He'd gained some idea of that man's taste in women, as well as what he liked to do to them.  And so five years later, when Taka Ouellette had departed in the belly of a CSIRA helicopter, Lubin had watched her depart with a dispassionate sense of finality.
Desjardins had promised her a role in the fight against Seppuku.  He had evoked visions of bright gleaming laboratories normally reserved for bona-fide Meatzarts.  The prospect had lit her up like a halogen floodlamp.  One look and Lubin had known her secret desire, the desperate, unimagined hope of redemption for some past sin.
It was easy enough to recognize.  He'd seen it before.
He had been interested in whether the aircraft would head southwest, towards Boston.  That was where the nearest research facilities were most likely to be.  But instead it had disappeared to the north, and Lubin had not heard from Ouellette in the days since.
Not that he could have expected to, of course.  Even if Desjardins had been telling the truth.  And Lubin had to admit, with the logical clarity of an amoral mind, that it didn't make much difference either way.  Taka Ouellette was not the caliber of scientist who'd last in the ring against any kind heavyweight opponent.  If she had been, they wouldn't have found her relegated to wildland patrol, handing out crumbs to the ferals.  Her loss would matter not at all in the fight against Seppuku.
Achilles Desjardins, on the other hand, was vital.    Whether he was also a sexual predator was irrelevant; he might well be instrumental in the saving of billions. Lubin couldn't think of many depravities that could not be overlooked in the pursuit of that higher goal.  It was what the Greater Good was all about.
He almost felt envious.
REMEDIAL ED
Taka Ouellette was, in fact, within a research facility of some sort.  She was not, however, playing the role of experimenter.  Perhaps the man at her side had arrogated that role unto himself.
His appearance was unremarkable.  Brown hair, uncombed, cut with a haphazard asymmetry as consistent with some faux-feral style as with outright incompetence.  Thin squarish face.  Not enough lines on the forehead, too many around the eyes.  Large eyes, brown and wet, almost childlike.  Nose slightly off-kilter.  Baggy green sweatshirt, a TwenCen throwback with no animations.
She couldn't see below his waist.  She was strapped to a medical gurney, flat on her back.  If this disheveled r-selector was playing the researcher, it seemed that he'd reserved for her the role of experimental subject.
"Achilles Desjardins," he said.  "Pleased to meet you, Alice."
The helicopter had dropped onto a rooftop pad somewhere north of the Great Lakes, well after midnight.  She'd debarked and stepped unsuspectingly into a neuroinduction field that dropped her faster than a cervical dislocate.  Faceless men in body condoms and brought her, conscious but paralyzed, into this quarantine cell.  They had stripped her naked, catheterized her, and departed without speaking.  Perhaps they'd been told she was some kind of fugitive or health risk.  Perhaps they'd been in on the joke.  She'd had no way of knowing, and no way to ask.
That had been a day ago, at least.  Probably more.  She had spent the time since isolated and immobilized, growing parched and ravenous by infinitesimal degrees.  
The field was off now, though.  Her motor nerves were back online.  The only things holding her down were the nylon straps cinched painfully around wrists and ankles, waist and throat.
"There's been a mistake," she said quickly.  "I'm not Alice, I'm Taka.  Lenie and Ken's friend."
She wriggled against the restraints.  Achilles smiled faintly.
"You're really not a very good biologist, Alice," he remarked, not unkindly.  "I'm sorry, but it's true.  You've had all kinds of clues, but you never quite put them together the right way."  He sat on some unseen chair or stool next to the gurney.  "If I hadn't stepped in you'd still be spreading Seppuku far and wide, killing your patients even faster than usual.  No real scientist would make such basic mistakes."
"But I'm not—"
He put a finger to his lips, shushing her.  He propped his elbows against the hard neoprene surface of the stretcher next to her head, rested chin in hands and looked down at her.
"Of course," he continued softly, "no real scientist would kill her own family, either."
So it wasn't a mistake.  He knew exactly who she was.
She knew him, too.  At least, she knew his type.  He was soft.  He was pathetic.  Every day she faced down people who'd break his neck without breaking stride.  On his own, without the props, he was nothing.
Except right.
She closed her eyes.  Keep control.  He's trying to scare you.  Don't let him.  Deny him the satisfaction.
It's a power game like all the others.  If you aren't intimidated, you take some back.
She opened her eyes and looked calmly into his.  "So what's the plan?"
"The plan."  Achilles pursed his lips.  "The plan is rehabilitation.  I'm going to give you another chance.  Think of it as a kind of remedial education."  He stood.  Something in his hand reflected the overhead lights, something small and shiny like a nail clipper.  "We're talking a kind of carrot and stick scenario.  I have this hobby that a lot of people would describe as, well, unpleasant.  You'll find out how unpleasant, depending on how quick a study you turn out to be."
Taka swallowed.  She didn't speak until she thought she could keep her voice level:  "What's the carrot, then?"
Not quite.
"That was the carrot.  My carrot, anyway. Your carrot is, you pass your orals and I let you go.  Alive and everything."  Achilles frowned, as if lost in thought.  "Here's an easy one to start with.  How does Seppuku reproduce?  Sexually or asexually?"
Taka stared at him.  "You're kidding."
He watched her a moment.  Then, almost sadly, he shook his head.
"You went to the seminars, I see.  They told you all our secrets.  We prey on fear.  Once we see you're not afraid, we'll pick on someone else.  Maybe even let you go."
"You said—"  she stopped, tried to control the tremor in her voice.  "You said you'd let me go..."  
He hadn't laid a hand on her and already she was begging.
"If you do well," Achilles reminded her gently.  "But yes.  I'll let you go.  In fact, as a gesture of good faith, I'll let part of you go right now."
He reached out.  The shiny thing in his hand pressed against her breast like a tiny icicle.  Something snicked.
Pain bloomed across her chest, razor-sharp, like the cracks in glass before it shatters.  Taka screamed, writhing in useless millimeter increments against the straps.
The bloody gobbet of a nipple dropped against her cheek.
Darkness swirled around the edges of vision.  At some impossible distant remove, way south of the pain at the center of the universe, a monster fingered its way between her labia.
"Two more where that came from," he remarked.
DECIRCULATE
Clarke had learned a fair bit at Ouellette's side.  She was no doctor, but she still had the rudimentary medical training she'd received as a rifter and the MI did most of the diagnostic and prescriptive work anyway.  Miri's exorcism had cost them a few thousand patient records, half a year's downloaded updates, and all the vehicle's uplink capabilities—but whatever remained still knew enough to scan a body and prescribe basic treatments.  Clarke wasn't up to dealing with much more sophistication than that anyway; even lobotomized, Miri was hardly the rate-limiting step.
People trickled through town, seeking Ouellette's ministrations but settling for Clarke's.  She did what the machinery told her, played doctor as best she could.  At night she'd sneak offshore and bypass Phocoena entirely, sleeping breathless and exposed on the bright, shallow bottom.  Each morning she came ashore, stripped her diveskin down to the tunic and pulled Ouellette's borrowed clothing overtop.  The strange dead fibers rubbed loosely against her limbs as she moved, an ill-fitting travesty full of folds and stitches.  Removing the 'skin always felt a little like being flayed alive; this, this substitute might as well have been shed from the flanks of some great poorly-proportioned lizard.  It wasn't too bad, though.  It was getting easier.
It was pretty much the only thing that was getting easier.
The worst part wasn't her own medical ignorance, or the endless, rising count of those she couldn't save.  It wasn't even the outbursts of violence that people sometimes directed at her when faced with their own death sentence, or with that of a loved one.  She was almost grateful for the shouts and the fists, thrown too rarely to constitute any kind of real cost.  She'd experienced far worse in her time, and Miri's weapons blister was always there when things got out of hand.
Much, much worse than the violence of those she didn't save was the gratitude of those she nearly could.  The smiles on the faces of those for whom she'd bought a little time, too dulled by disease and malnutrition to ever question the economics of trading a quick death for a lingering one.  The pathetic delight of some father who'd seen his daughter cured of encephalitis, not knowing or caring that Seppuku or the Witch or some rogue flamethrower would take her next month or next year, not thinking of the rapes and broken bones and chronic starvation that would stalk her in the days between.  Hope seemed nowhere more abundant than in the faces of the hopeless; and it was all she could do to meet their eyes, and smile, and accept their thanks.  And not tell them who it was that had brought all this down upon the world in the first place.
Her experiment with naked eyes was long since over.  If the locals didn't like her affect, they could damn well go somewhere else.
She wanted desperately to talk to Taka.  Most of the time she resisted the impulse, remembering:  Ouellette's friendship had evaporated the instant she'd learned the truth.  Clarke didn't blame her.  It couldn't be easy, discovering you'd befriended a monster.
One night, lonely enough to gamble, she tried anyway.  She used a channel that Desjardins had assigned for reporting any late-breaking Seppuku incidents; it got her to an automated dispatcher and thence to an actual human being who—despite his obvious disapproval over personal use of dedicated channels—patched her through to someone claiming to speak for a biological countermeasures lab out of Boston.  He had never heard of Taka Ouellette.  When Clarke asked if there might be other facilities she could check with, the man replied that there must be—but the goddamned Entropy Patrol never told them anything, and he wouldn't know where to point her.
She made do by indulging in false hopes.  Lubin would catch his prey.  Desjardins would honor the deal they had made.  They would track down the threat to Atlantis, and disarm it.  And Taka Ouellette, or others like her, would solve the mystery of Seppuku and stop it in its tracks.
Maybe then they could go home.

#

She didn't even recognize him at first.
He came staggering out of the woods on foot, limping, purple-skinned, his face a swollen mass of scabs and pulpy bruises.  He wore a thermochrome windbreaker with one of the arms torn away, and he lurched into sight just as Clarke was about to shut down for the evening.
"Hi again," he said, a bubble of blood grew and popped at the corner of his mouth.  "Miss me?"
"Holy shit." She hurried over and helped him towards the MI.  "What happened to you?"
"'Nother r.  A Big r.  Fucking capital r.  Took my bike."  He shook his head; the gesture was stiff and clumsy, as if rigor mortis were already taking hold.  "That other K around?  Taka?"
"No.  I'll look after you."  She guided him to Miri's right mouth, took his weight as he sagged onto the extended tongue.
"You really a doctor?"  The teenager managed to look skeptical through all the gore.  "Not that I care," he added after a moment.  "You can check me over any time."
Finally it sunk in:  Miss me?
Clarke shook her head.  "I'm sorry, but I've seen a lot of people lately.  I don't know if I'd recognize you even without all the facework."
"Ricketts," the boy said.
She stepped back.  "You brought—"
"I brought that stuff that's gonna kill ?ehemoth," he said proudly through cracked and puffy lips.
You brought the stuff that's going to kill us all, she thought.
It shouldn't have been any kind of dilemma.  Get him into the MI.  Clean him up, fix the physical injuries, confirm the presence of any new predator eating him from the inside out.
Maybe he's clean.  All the contaminated stuff was sealed up in that bag, maybe he never had direct contact—
Confirm Seppuku.  Isolate the victim.  Call for extraction.
Hope to God that if he's got it, he can't breathe it on me...
"Lie back.  Get your feet up."  She was at the rear panel almost before Ricketts had taken his feet off the ground.  She stabbed the usual icon, heard the familiar hum as Miri swallowed.  Clarke told the vehicle to close both mouths and run the standard diagnostic suite.
She left him in there while she sprayed herself down with disinfectant.  Overkill, probably.  Hopefully.  She was wearing the requisite sterile gloves, and the 'skin of her tunic protected her under Ouellette's borrowed clothing—
Shit.  The clothing.
She stripped it off and bagged it for incineration.  The rest of her diveskin was in her backpack, stashed in the cab.  The forsaken pieces, retrieved, wriggled back into place, seams sealing together into a comforting second skin.  Diveskins weren't built with antipathogen properties explicitly in mind, but the copolymer dealt with salt ions as a matter of course; it had to keep out anything as large as a living cell.
When she got back to Miri's rear panel, the diagnostic cycle had finished.  Rickets was suffering from a broken cheekbone, a hairline fracture of the left tibia, second-degree concussion, borderline malnutrition (better than average, these days), two impacted wisdom teeth, and a moderate roundworm infection.  None of that was life-threatening; most of it could be fixed.
The diagnostic suite did not include a scan for Seppuku.  Seppuku didn't exist in the standard database.  Ouellette had cobbled together a hasty, separate subroutine in the wake of her discovery.  It didn't do much—no helpful breakdown into first/second/end-stage categories, no list of associated macrosymptoms.  No suggested course of treatment.  Just a blood count, really.  Clarke didn't even know how to interpret that simple number.  Was there such a thing as a "safe" level for Seppuku?
Zero, she assumed.  She tapped the icon to start the test.  Ricketts twitched in the little spycam window as Miri drank a few more drops of his blood.  
It would take a while to run the analysis.  Clarke forced herself to focus on Ricketts's other problems in the meantime.  The roundworms and the teeth could wait.  Targeted vasodilators and calcium suppressants eased the concussion.  Broken bones were almost trivial: plant microcharge mesh into the affected areas to crank up osteoblast metabolism.  Clarke had been doing that almost since the day she'd become a rifter.  
"Hey!"  Rickett's voice sounded tinny and startled through Miri's intercom.  "I can't move!"
"It's the neuroinduction field," Clarke told him.  "Don't worry about it.  It just keeps you from jerking around during the cut-and-paste." 
Beep.
And there it was.  106 particles per milliliter.
Oh Jesus.
How long had he been wandering around in the woods?  How far had he spread it?  The person who'd beaten him up:  was he spreading it now, had he invited Seppuku in through the raw oozing skin of his knuckles?  How many days before he discovered how much he'd really paid for a lousy motorbike?
Isolate the vector.  Call in a lifter.
A lifter.  It seemed so strange to even contemplate.  She had to keep reminding herself:  they're not monsters after all.  They're not fire-breathing dragons sent down from the heavens to burn us out of existence.  They're working for the good guys.
We're on their side now.
Still.
First things first.  Ricketts had to be—
decirculated
—isolated until someone came by to collect him.  Problem was, there weren't too many ways to do that.  The MI would be useless for other field work as long as it kept him sequestered, and Clarke seriously doubted whether Freeport had had hot-zone isolation facilities even before it fell into ruin.
He can't stay here.
She watched the monitor for a few moments, watched Miri's jointed limbs and laser eyes putting Humpty together again.  Then she called up the anesthesia menu.  She chose isoflurane.  
"Go to sleep," she whispered.
Within moments, Ricketts' wide, nervous eyes fluttered closed.  It was like watching a lethal injection.

#

"Do you know who I am, you miserable fetus-fucker?" the demon spat.
No, she thought.
"I'm Lenie Clarke!"
The system crashed.
"Yeah," Clarke said softly.  "Right."
She traded a dark view for a brighter one.  Phocoena's viewport looked out on a muddy plain, not quite featureless;  the muddy tracks of tunneling animals, the holes of invertebrate burrows stippled the bottom.  A lone crab scuttled lethargically in the dim distance.
The ocean overhead was murky green, and growing brighter.  The sun must be rising.  
"What...?"
She hung the headset on the armrest and turned in the copilot's seat.  Phocoena was too small to warrant a dedicated med cubby, but the fold-down bunk on the starboard side pulled double-duty in a pinch.  It tucked away into the same kind of molded indentation that held the bunks on the opposite bulkhead; unlike its counterparts, though, its thicker base bulged from the wall in a smooth distension of plumbing and circuitry.  When in use it folded down like a wide, short drawbridge, hung by twin monofilament threads spooled from its outer corners. Those threads, the edges of the pallet itself, and the overhanging bulkhead formed the vertices of a little tent.  Isolation membrane stretched across the planes between.
Ricketts was trapped within. He lay on his side with one arm flopped against the membrane, distending it outward.
"Hi," Clarke said.
"Where's this?"
"We're underwater."  She climbed back from her seat into the main cabin, keeping her head low; the curving hull didn't leave a lot of headroom.
He tried to sit up.  He had even less headroom than she did.  "What am I, you know..."
She took a breath.  "You've got a—a bug.  It's contagious.  I thought it would be best to keep you isolated."
His bruises were already healing, thanks to Miri's attentions.  The rest of his face paled behind them.  "The witch?"  And then, remembering:  "But I brought you that cure, right...?"
"The cure wasn't—all we'd been hoping for," Clarke said.  "It actually turned out to be something...else..."
He thought about that a moment.  He pushed his splayed fingers against the membrane.  The membrane stretched, iridescing.
"You saying...you saying it's like another disease?"
"Afraid so."
"So that explains it," he murmured.
"Explains what?"
"Why I been so weak the last coupla days.  Prob'ly still have my bike if I'd been just that much faster."  He frowned at her.  "So you go around broadbanding how this germware kicks ?ehemoth's ass and how we're supposed to like, collect it and all, and it's really just another bug?"
Just another bug.  If only.  "Sorry," she said softly. 
"Fuck."  Ricketts lay back on the pallet and threw one arm over his face.  "Ow," he added, almost as an afterthought.
"Yeah, your arm's going to be sore for a bit.  You were pretty badly beat up, the MI can't fix everything just like that."
He held up the limb and examined it.  "It does feel a lot better, though.  Everything feels better.  Thanks."
Clarke forced a smile. 
He was up on his elbows, looking from the smaller cage into the larger one.  "This whole set-up isn't bad.  Way better than that priestly meat wagon."
It wasn't, of course.  Phocoena's med facilities were rudimentary at best, far below what the MI could offer.  "I'm afraid you'll have to stay in there for a while," Clarke said apologetically.  "I know it's cramped, but the onboard's got games and shows, help you pass the time."  She gestured at a headset hanging from the roof of the nook. "I can give you access."
"Great.  Better'n an oven."
"Oven?"
"You know."  He tapped his temple.  "Microwaves.  Give you a fine buzz if you jimmy the doors and stick your head just so."
Good trick, Clarke mused.  Wish I'd known it when I was a kid.
Then again, maybe I did...   
"What if I have to shit?"  Ricketts wondered.
She nodded at a convex button set into the recessed bulkhead.  "The pallet converts.  Push that when you have to go.  It's pretty straightforward."
He did, then let out a little yelp of surprise as the midsection of the pallet slid smoothly away underneath him.  His ass bumped down on the wide rim of the bowl beneath.
"Wow," he whispered, impressed out of all proportion.  Another press of the button and the pallet reintegrated.  
"So what now?" he asked.
Now you get to be a lab rat.  Now you'll go to some place where machines cut pieces out of you until either you die, or the thing inside of you does.  Now, you'll be grilled on how long you hung around in Freeport, how many others you might have breathed on, how many others they might have.  They'll find out about that asshole who beat you up and maybe they'll want to interview him. Or maybe not.  Maybe they'll just decide it's already gone too far for pleasant interviews and nice individual extractions—because after all, if we have to sacrifice you to save Freeport, surely we also have to sacrifice Freeport to save New England now, don't we?  That's the greater good for you, kid.  It's a sliding scale.  It's concentric.
And nobody's life is worth shit when they slap it onto the table. 
She'd roll the dice.  Maybe hundreds would die in flames.  Maybe only Ricketts would, in pieces.
"Hello?"  Ricketts said.  "You here?"
Clarke blinked.  "Sorry?"
"I said, what now?"
"I don't know yet," she told him.
PARANOID
Aaron had led to Beth.  Beth had led to Habib, and Habib had led to Xander, and the whole lot of them had led to twenty thousand hectares of wasted New England countryside being put to the flame.  And that wasn't all:  According to the chatter on the restricted band there were at least three other operatives sweeping the field further south, Desjardins's preference for low profiles notwithstanding.  
Eight days now, and Seppuku was living up to the hype.  It was spreading faster than ?ehemoth ever had.
Xander had also led to Phong, and Phong was fighting back.  Lubin had him cornered in the mouth of an old storm-sewer that drooled slimy water into the Merrimack River.  The mouth was a good two meters in diameter, set into a concrete cliff  perhaps three times that height.  It had a tongue, a triangular spillway widening out towards the river, flanked by rising abutments that held back the banks to either side.  The spillway constituted the only clear avenue of approach and was slippery with brownish-green scum.
The mouth also had teeth, a grate of metal bars set a meter back from the opening.  They kept Phong from escaping underground, and had forced him to fall back on his one high card:  an antique firearm that shot bullets of indeterminate caliber.  Lubin trumped him twice over on that score; he carried a Schubert active-denial microwave pistol that could heat flesh to 60?C, and a Heckler & Koch rapid-fire PDW that was currently loaded with mitigated conotoxins.  Unfortunately there was way too much earth and concrete for the microwaves to penetrate from Lubin's present position, and getting a clear shot with the H&K would involve exposing himself on the slimy slope of the spillway.
It shouldn't have mattered.  Under normal circumstances it would still be the furthest thing from an even match, even granting Lubin's rusty marksmanship after five years.  Even though Phong's refuge was in shadow, and the sun stabbed directly into Lubin's eyes whenever he peeked around the corner.  Those all made the shot trickier, no question.  Still.  Lubin was a professional.
No, what really skewed the odds was the fact that Phong seemed to have a thousand bodyguards, and they were all attacking Lubin at once.
He'd scarcely noticed them on approach:  a cloud of midges hovering over a patch of resistant greenery on the embankment.  They'd always been completely harmless in Lubin's experience.  He'd dispersed them with a wave of his hand as he passed through, his attention on the concrete barrier that cut the riverbank just ahead...and in the next instant they'd attacked, a swarm of mosquito-sized insects with piranha-sized attitudes.
They bit, and they distracted, and they broke both his concentration and his stealth.  Phong, stealing a drink from the sewer, had seen him coming and squeezed off a near miss before ducking back under cover.  He'd almost escaped entirely, but Lubin had plunged through the insectile onslaught to the edge of the drainage apron, just in time to trap his quarry back against the tunnel.
"I'm here to get you to a hospital!" he called.  "You've been exposed to—"
"Fuck you!" Phong shouted back.
A squad of dive-bombing insects attacked Lubin's hand, almost in formation; the little bastards had followed him.  He slapped down hard.  He missed his attackers but welcomed the sting of the impact.  He unrolled the gloves from the wrists of his isolation skin and slipped them on, juggling the Schubert, then reached over his shoulder for the hood.
The velcro tab on the back of his collar was empty.  His hood was probably hanging off some low-lying branch in the woods behind him.
And he was going up against someone who'd been exposed to Seppuku for two full days.  Lubin allowed himself a muttered, "Shit."
"I don't want to hurt you!" he tried again.  Which wasn't exactly true, and getting less so.  The desire to kill something was certainly circling around his self-control.  More insects attacked; he crushed them between hand and forearm, and reached to wipe the smashed body parts off against the river bank.  He paused, briefly distracted:  it was hard to be certain, but those crushed bodies seemed to have too many legs.
He wiped them off and focused on the immediate task. "You're coming with me," he called, his voice raised but level. "That's not up for discussion."  Insects have—right.  Six legs. He waved off another assault; a line of pinpricks lit up the back of his neck.  "The only issue is whether you come now or later."
"Later, stumpfuck!  I know whose side you on!"
"We can also discuss whether I'll be taking you to a hospital or a crematorium," Lubin muttered.
A squadron targeted his face.  He slapped his forehead, hard.  His hand came away with three tiny carcasses flattened against the palm.  Each had eight legs. 
What had eight legs?  Spiders? Flying spiders?
Hunting in packs?
He wiped his palm against a patch of convenient vines matting the embankment.  The vines squirmed at his touch.
He pulled his hand back instinctively, shocked.  What the—  
Tweaked, obviously.  Or some kind of accidental hybrid.  The foliage clenched and relaxed in peristaltic waves. 
Focus.  Keep on track.
More dive-bombers.  Not quite so many this time.  Maybe he'd swatted most of the swarm already.  He felt as if he'd swatted a hundred swarms.
A scrabbling, from beyond the barrier.
Lubin peeked around the abutment.  Phong was making a break for it, scrambling along a dry strip of concrete edging the far side of the spillway.  Startling graffiti decorated the wall behind him, a stylized female face with white featureless eyes and a zigzag moniker:  MM.
Phong saw him, fired three wild rounds.  Lubin didn't even bother to duck; his microwave was already set on wide beam, too diffuse for a quick kill but easily strong enough to reheat Phong's last meal along with most of the gastrointestinal tract that was holding it.  Phong doubled over, retching, to land on the thin skin of wastewater and the frictionless slime beneath it.  He slid diagonally down the spillway, out of control.  Lubin put one foot on a convenient dry patch and leaned out to catch him as he passed.
The Airborne Spider Brigade chose that exact moment for its last hurrah.
Suddenly Lubin's face and neck were wrapped in stinging nettles.  Overextended, he struggled for balance.  Phong sailed past; one flailing leg careened against Lubin's ankle.  Lubin went over like a pile of very angry bricks.
They slid off the spillway into freefall.
It wasn't a long drop, but it was a hard landing.  The Merrimack was a mere shadow of its former self; they landed not in water but on a broken mosaic of shale and cracked mud, barely moistened by the outfall.  Lubin got some slight satisfaction from the fact that Phong landed underneath him.
Phong threw up again on impact.
Lubin rolled away and stood, wiping vomit from his face.  Shards of shale snapped and slipped beneath his feet. His face and neck and hands itched maddeningly.  (At least he seemed to have finally shaken the kamikaze arthropods.)  His right forearm was skinned and oozing, the supposedly-unbreachable isolation membrane ripped from palm to elbow.  A knife-edged splinter of stone, the size of his thumb, lay embedded in the heel of his hand.  He pulled it free.  The jolt that shot up his forearm felt almost electrical. Blood welled from the gash.  Mopping at the gore revealed clumped particles of fatty tissue, like clusters of ivory pinheads, deep in the breach.
The microwave pistol lay on the scree a few meters away.  He retrieved it, wincing.
Phong still lay on his back, winded, bruised, his left leg twisted at angle impossible to reconcile with the premise of an intact tibia.  His skin reddened as Lubin watched, small blisters rising on his face in the wake of the microwave burst.  Phong was in bad shape.
"Not bad enough,"  Lubin remarked, looking down at him.
Phong looked up through glazed eyes and muttered something like Wha...
You were not worth the trouble, Lubin thought.  There was no excuse for me to even break a sweat over the likes of you.  You're nothing.  You're less than nothing.  How dare you get so lucky.  How dare you piss me off like this.
He kicked Phong in the ribs.  One broke with a satisfying snap.
Phong yelped.
"Shhh," Lubin murmured soothingly.  He brought the heel of his boot down on Phong's outstretched hand, ground it back and forth.  Phong screamed.
Lubin spent a moment contemplating Phong's right leg—the intact one—but decided to leave it unbroken.  There was a certain aesthetic in the asymmetry.  Instead, he brought his foot down again, hard, on the broken left one.
Phong screamed and fainted, escaping into brief oblivion.  It didn't matter; Lubin's hard-on had been assured with the first snapping bone.
Go on, he urged himself. 
He walked unhurriedly around the broken man until he found himself next to Phong's head.  Experimentally, he lifted his foot.
Go on.  It doesn't matter.  Nobody cares.
But he had rules.  They weren't nearly so inviolable as when he'd been Guilt Tripped, but in a way that was the whole point.  To make his own decisions.  To follow his own algorithm.  To prove he didn't have to give in, to prove he was stronger than his impulses.
Prove it to who?  Who's here to care?  But he already knew the answer.
It's not his fault.  It's yours.
Lubin sighed.  He lowered his foot, and waited.

#

"A man named Xander gave you a vial," he said calmly, squatting at Phong's side a half-hour later.
Phong stared wide-eyed and shook his head.  He did not seem pleased to be back in the real world.  "Please...don't—"
"You were told that it contained a counteragent, that it would kill off ?ehemoth if it was disseminated widely enough.  I thought so myself, at first.  I understand that you were only trying to do the right thing."  Lubin leaned in close.  "Are you following me, Phong?"
Phong gulped and nodded.
Lubin stood.  "We were both misinformed.  The vial you were given will only make things worse.  If you hadn't been so busy trying to kill me you could have saved us both a lot—"  A sudden thought occurred to him.  "Just out of interest, why were you trying to kill me?"
Phong looked torn.
"I'd really like to know," Lubin said, without the slightest trace of threat in his voice.
"You—they said people trying to stop the cure," Phong blurted.
"Who?"
"Just people.  On the radio."  Alone, helpless, half his bones broken, and still he was trying to protect his contacts.  Not bad, Lubin had to admit.
"We're not," he said.  "And if you had been in touch with Xander and Aaron and their friends lately, you'd know that for yourself.  They're very sick."
"No."  It was probably meant to be a protest, but Phong didn't seem able to put any conviction into the word. 
"I need to know what you did with that vial," Lubin said.
"I...I ate it," Phong managed.
"You ate it.  You mean, you drank the contents."
"Yes."
"You didn't disseminate it anywhere.  You drank it all yourself."
"Yes."
"Why, may I ask?"
"They say it cure ?ehemoth.  I—I first stage already.  They say I dead by winter, and I could not get into forts..."
Lubin didn't dare touch the man, not with his isolation skin in tatters.  He studied Phong's exposed and reddened skin, at the blisters rising across it.  If there had been any obvious signs of either ?ehemoth or Seppuku, they were now indistinguishable under the burns.  He tried to remember if Phong had presented any symptoms prior to being shot.
"When did you do this?" he asked at last.
"Two days.  I felt fine until...you...you..."  Phong squirmed weakly, winced at the result.
Two days.  Seppuku was fast, but all the symptomatic vectors Lubin had encountered had been infected for longer than that.  It was probably only a matter of hours before Phong started presenting.  A day or two at most. 
"—to me?"  Phong was saying.
Lubin looked down at him.  "What?"
"What you do to me?"
"A lifter's on the way.  You'll be in a medical facility by nightfall."
"I'm sorry," Phong said, and coughed.  "They say I be dead by winter," he repeated in a weak voice.
"You will be," Lubin told him.
MATRIOSKA
Clarke didn't make the call.
She'd had closer contact with Ricketts than anyone except the person who'd assaulted him, and she'd checked out clean.  She was willing to bet that the people of Freeport were clean too.
She wasn't willing to bet that the trigger fingers would agree with her.
She knew the arguments.  She knew the virtues of erring on the side of caution.  She just didn't buy them, not when the people making those decisions sat in untouchable far-off towers adding columns of empty numbers and Bayesian probabilities.  Maybe the experts were right, maybe the only people truly qualified to run the world were those without conscience—clear-eyed, rational, untroubled by the emotional baggage that the sight of piled bodies could induce in the unblessed.  People weren't numbers, but maybe the only way to do the right thing was to act as if they were.
Maybe.  She wasn't going to bet the town of Freeport on it, though.
They were nowhere close to a cure, according to the dispatches.  There was nothing anyone could do for Ricketts except poke at him.   Perhaps that would change at some point.  Perhaps it would even happen before Seppuku killed him, although that seemed vanishingly unlikely.  In the meantime,  Lubin was good at his job—maybe a bit past his prime, but easily more than a match for a handful of infected ferals who didn't even know they were being hunted.  If the Meatzarts needed live samples, Lubin was the man to provide them.  
There was no need to feed this skinny kid into that system.  Clarke had learned a few things about research protocols over the years:  even after the cures are discovered, who bothers rehabilitating the lab rats?
Taka Ouellette, maybe.  Clarke would have trusted her in an instant.  But Clarke didn't know where she was or how to reach her.  She certainly didn't trust the system to deliver Ricketts into her exceptional arms.  And Ricketts, surprisingly, seemed content where he was.  In fact, he seemed almost happy there.  Maybe he'd forgotten the old days,  or maybe he hadn't been very well-off even then.  But by the time he'd fallen into Clarke's orbit he knew only the grubby, dying landscape upon which he expected to live his whole short life.  Probably the most he'd dared hope for was to die in peace and alone in some sheltered ruin, before being torn apart for his clothes or the dirt in his pockets.
To be rescued from that place, to wake up in a gleaming submarine at the bottom of the sea—that must have seemed magical beyond dreams.  Ricketts came from a life so grim that terminal exile on the ocean floor was actually a step up.
I could just let him die here, Clarke thought, and he'd be happier than he'd ever been in his life.
She kept her eyes open, of course.  She wasn't stupid.  Seppuku was afoot in the world, and Ricketts had vectored it all the way from Vermont.  At the very least there was some thug with a stolen motorbike to worry about.  She tested everyone that Miri swallowed, no matter what their complaint.   She read encrypted dispatches intended only for those in the loop.  She watched public broadcasts aimed at the ferals themselves, transmissions from high-tech havens in Boston and Augusta:  weather, MI schedules, waiting times at the ?ehemoth forts—incongruously, coding tips.  She marveled that the castle-dwellers would dare present themselves this way, as if they could redeem themselves by sending public service bulletins to those they'd trampled in their own rush to safety. 
She drove the back roads and checked derelict dwellings looking for business, for people too weak to seek her out.  She queried her patients:  did they know anyone who had come down with high fever, soreness in the joints, sudden weakness?  
Nothing.
She thought of her friend, Achilles Desjardins.  She wondered if he was still alive, or if he had died when Spartacus rewired his brain.  The circuits that made him who he was had been changed, after all.  He had been changed.  Maybe he'd been changed so much that he didn't even exist any more.  Maybe he was a whole new being, living in Desjardins's head, running off his memories.
One thing seemed to have stayed the same, though.  Desjardins was still one of the trigger fingers, still entrusted to kill the many to save the multitude.  Maybe someday—maybe soon—he'd have to do that here.  Lenie Clarke realized as much:  she might be wrong.  Extreme measures might prove necessary.  
Not yet, though.  If Seppuku gestated in the ghost town of Freeport, it was laying low.   Lenie Clarke did likewise.  In the meantime, Ricketts was her little secret.
For as long as he lasted, anyway.  It wasn't looking good.

#

She stepped dripping from the diver 'lock in Phocoena's tail.  Ricketts was wetter than she was.
His skin was beyond pink; it was so flushed it almost looked sunburned.  He'd long since stripped off his rags, and now lay naked on a pallet that could soak up perspiration barely faster than he produced it.
None of his biotelemetry was in the red yet, according to the panel.  That was something.
He had the headset on, but he turned his head at the sound of her entrance.  The blind, cowled face seemed to look right through her.  "Hi."  The smile on his face was an absurd paradox.
"Hi," she said, stepping to the cycler on the opposite bulkhead.  "Hungry?" She was only filling the silence; the drip in his arm kept him fed as well as medicated.
He shook his head.  "Thanks.  Busy."
In VR, perhaps.  The handpad lay discarded by his knees, but there were other interfaces. 
"This is great," he murmured.
Clarke looked at him.  How can you say that? she wondered.  How can you just act as though there's nothing wrong?  Don't you know you're dying?
But of course he probably didn't.  If Phocoena couldn't cure him, at least it wasn't letting him suffer:  it kept his fluids up, gagged internal alarms, soothed nerves when they burned with fever or nausea.  And it wasn't just ?ehemoth's ravages that the medbed would have swept under the rug.  Ricketts's whole life must have been an ongoing litany of low-level discomfort, chronic infections, parasite loads, old injuries badly healed.  All those baseline aches and pains would be gone too, as far as this boy could tell.  He probably felt healthier than he'd felt in years.  He probably thought his weakness would pass.
He probably thought he was getting better.  The only way he'd know otherwise would be if Lenie Clarke told him the truth.
She turned from the cycler and climbed forward into the cockpit.  Systems telltales winked and wriggled under the dark crystal of the pilot's dash.  There was something vaguely off about those readouts, something Clarke couldn't quite—
"It's so clean in here,"  Ricketts said.
He wasn't in VR.  He wasn't playing games.
He'd hacked into nav.
She straightened so fast her head cracked against the overhead viewport.  "What are you doing in there?  That's not—"
"There's no wildlife at all," he went on, amazed.  "Not even, like, a worm, far as I can tell.  And everything's so, so..." he fell silent, groping for the word.
She was back at his cage.  Ricketts lay staring at Phocoena's pristine datascape, emaciated, anesthetized, lost in wonder.
"Whole," he said at last.
She reached out.  The membrane tugged gently at her fingertips, webbed her fingers, stretched back along her forearm.   She briefly touched his shoulder.  His head rolled in her direction, not so much an act of will as of gravity.
"How are you doing that?" she asked.
"Doing...?  Oh.  Saccadal keyboard.  You know.  Eye movements."  He smiled weakly.  "Easier'n the handpad."
"No, I mean, how did you get into Phocoena?"
"Wasn't I supposed to?"  He pushed the eyephones up on a forehead beaded with sweat and stared, frowning.  He seemed to be having trouble focusing on her.  "You said I could use the onboard."
"I meant games."
"Oh," Ricketts said.  "I don't really...you know, I didn't..."
"It's okay," she told him.
"I was just looking around.  Didn't rewrite anything.  It's not like there was security or, you know." Then added, a moment later, "Hardly any."
Clarke shook her head.  Ken would kill me if he knew I'd let this kid in.  He'd at least kick my ass for not putting a few passwords in place.
Something scratched at the back of her mind, something Ricketts had just said.  You said I could use the onboard.  I was just looking around.  I didn't rewrite any—
"Wait a second," she said, "Are you saying you could rewrite the nav code if you wanted to?"
Ricketts licked his lips.  "Prob'ly not.  Don't even really know what it's for.  I mean, I could tweak it all right, but it'd just be like random changes."
"But you're saying you can code."
"Well, yeah.  Kinda."
"Out there in the wilds.  Poking around in the ruins.  You learned to code."
"No more'n anyone else."  He seemed honestly confused.  "What, you think the claves took all our watches and stuff before  they hived up?  You think we don't have electricity or something?"
Of course there'd be power sources.  Left-over Ballard Stacks, private windmills, the photoelectric paint that kept those stupid billboards hawking neutriceuts and fashion accessories into the middle of the apocalypse itself.  But that hardly meant—
"You can code," she murmured, incredulous even as she remembered the programming tips she'd seen on public television.
"You can't grow a little code here and there, you can forget about using your watch 'cept for time and bulls.  How'd you think I found you guys, you think GPS fixes itself when worms and Shredders get in there?"
He was breathing fast and shallow, as if the effort of so many words had winded him.  But he was proud, too, Clarke could tell.  Feral Kid On Last Legs Impresses Exotic Older Woman.  
And she was impressed, despite herself.
Ricketts could code.

#

She showed him her Cohen board.  Curled up in his cage he tapped his own headset, arm wobbling with the effort.  He frowned, apparently taken aback by his own weakness.  
"So pipe it through," he said after a moment
She shook her head.  "No wireless.  Too risky.  It might get out."
He looked at her knowingly.  "Shredder?" 
"I think they call it a—a shredder."
He nodded.  "Shredders, Lenies, Madonnas.  All the same thing."
"It keeps crashing."
"Well, yeah.  That's what they do."
"It couldn't have been crashing the OS, that was read-only.  It was crashing itself."
He managed a half-shrug.
"But why would it do that?  I've seen them run a lot longer than five seconds out in the wild.  Do you think, maybe—?"
"Sure," he said.  "I can take a look.  But you gotta do something too."
"What's that?"
"Take those stupid things outta your eyes."
Reflexively, she stepped back.  "Why?"
"I just wanna see them. Your eyes."
What are you so afraid of?  she asked herself.  Do you think he'll see the truth in there?
But of course she was much better than that.  Better than he was, anyway:  she forced herself to disarm, and afterwards—looking straight into her naked eyes—he didn't seem to see a thing he didn't want to.
"You should leave them like that.  It's almost like you're beautiful."
"No it isn't."  She dialed down the membrane and pushed the board through:  Ricketts fumbled it; the contraption dropped onto the pallet beside him, the iso membrane sealing seamlessly in its wake.  Clarke cranked its surface tension back to maximum while Ricketts, embarrassed by his own clumsiness, studied the board with feigned intensity.
Slowly, carefully, he slipped the headset into place and didn't fuck up.  He sagged onto his back, breathing heavily.  The Cohen Board flickered to light.
"Shit," he hissed suddenly.  "Nasty little bitch."  And a moment later:  "Oh.  There's your problem."
"What?"
"Elbow room.  She, like, attacks random addresses, only you put her in this really small cage so she ends up just clawing her own code.  She'd last longer if you added memory."  He paused, then asked, "Why are you keeping her, anyway?"
"I just wanted to—ask it some things," Clarke hedged.
"You're kidding, right?"
She shook her head, although he couldn't see her.  "Um—" 
"You do get that she doesn't, like, understand anything?" 
It took a moment for the words to sink in.  "What do you mean?"
"She's nowhere near big enough," Ricketts told her.  "Wouldn't last two minutes in a Turing test."
"But it was talking back.  Before it crashed."
"No she wasn't."
"Ricketts, I heard it."
He snorted; the sound turned into a racking cough.  "She's got a dialog tree, sure.  She's got like keyword reflexes and stuff, but that's not—"
Heat rose in her cheeks.  I'm such an idiot.
"I mean, some Shredders are smart enough, I guess," he added.  "Just not this one."
She ran her fingers over her scalp.  "Is there some other way to—interrogate it, maybe?  Different interface?  Or, I don't know, decompile the code?"
"It evolved. You ever try to figure out evolved code?"
"No."
"It's really messy.  Most of it doesn't even do anything any more, it's all just junk genes left over from..." his voice trailed off.
"And why don't you just flush her anyway?" he asked, very softly. "These things aren't smart.  They're not special.  They're just shitbombs some assholes throw at us to try and crash whatever we got left.  They even attack each other if you give 'em half a chance.  If it weren't for the firewalls and the exorcists and stuff they'd have wrecked everything by now."
Clarke didn't answer. 
Almost sighing, Ricketts said:  "You're really strange, you know?"
She smiled a bit.
"Nobody's gonna believe me when I tell them about this.  Too bad you can't, you know,  come back with me.  Just so they won't think I made it all up."
"Back?"
"Home.  When I get out of here."
"Well," she said, "you never know."
A pathetic, gap-toothed smile bloomed beneath his headset.  
"Ricketts," she said after a while.
No answer.  He lay there, patient and inert, still breathing.  The telemetry panel continued to scribble out little traces of light, cardio, pulmo,  neocort.  All way too high; Seppuku had cranked his metabolic rate into the stratosphere. 
He's asleep.  He's dying.  Let him be.
She climbed into the cockpit and collapsed into the pilot's station.  The viewports around her glowed with a dim green light, fading to gray.  She'd left the cabin lights off;  Phocoena was a submerged cave in the dying light, its recesses already hidden in shadow.  By now she was almost fond of the blindness afforded her naked eyes.  
So often now, darkness seemed the better choice.
BASEMENT WIRING
First he blinded her, put stinging drops into her eyes that reduced the whole world to a vague gray abstraction.  He wheeled her out of the cell down corridors and elevators whose presence she could only infer only through ambient acoustics and a sense of forward motion.  Those were what she focused on:  momentum, and sound, and the blurry photosensitivity that one might get by looking at the world through a thick sheet of waxed paper.  She tried to ignore the smell of her own shit pooling beneath her on the gurney.  She tried to ignore the pain, not so raw and electric now, but spread across her whole thorax like a great stinging bruise.
It was impossible, of course.  But she tried.
Her vision was beginning to clear when the gurney rolled to a stop.  She could see blurry shapes in the fog by the time the induction field cut back in and reduced her once more to a rag doll, unable even to struggle within restraint.  The view sharpened in small increments as her tormentor installed her in some kind of rigid exoskeleton that would have posed her on all fours, if any part of her had been touching the ground.  It was gimbaled; a gentle push from the side and the fuzzy outlines of the room rotated lazily past her eyes, as if she were affixed to a merry-go-round.
By the time she got her motor nerves back, she could see clearly again.  She was in a dungeon.  There was nothing medieval about it, no torches on the walls.  Indirect light glowed from recessed grooves that ran along the edges of the ceiling.  The loops and restraints hanging from the wall in front of her were made of memetic polymers.  The blades and coils and alligator clips on the bench to her left were stainless gleaming alloy.  The floor was a spotless mosaic of Escher tiles, cerulean fish segueing into jade waterfowl.  Even the cleansers and stain removers on the cart by the door were, she had no doubt, filled with the latest synthetics.  The only anachronistic touch was a pile of rough wooden poles leaning up against one corner of the room.  Their tips had been hand-whittled to points.
There was a collar—a pillory, actually—around her neck.  It blinded her to anything behind.  Perhaps realizing this, Achilles Desjardins stepped accommodatingly into view at her left side, holding a handpad.
It's only him, she thought, a bit giddily.  The others didn't know.  If they had, why had they been wearing body condoms?  Why the pretense of a quarantine cell, why not just bring her here directly?  The men who'd delivered her didn't know what was going on.  They must have been told she was a vector, a danger, someone who'd try to escape the moment she knew the jig was up.  They must have thought they'd been doing the right thing.
It didn't make any difference to her current predicament.  But it mattered just the same:  the whole world wasn't mad.  Parts of it were just misinformed.
Achilles looked down at her.  She looked back; the stock pushed against her head as she craned her neck.
She squirmed.  The frame that held her body seemed to tighten a tiny bit.  "Why are you doing this?"
He shrugged. "To get off.  Thought that'd be obvious even to a fuckup like you, Alice."
Her lower lip trembled uncontrollably.  She bit down on it, hard.  Don't give him anything.  Don't give him anything.  But of course it was way too late for that.
"You look like you want to say something," Achilles remarked.
She shook her head.
"Come on, girl.  Speak!  Speak, girl!"
I've got nothing to say to you, you fucking asshole.
His hand was in his pocket again.  Something in there made a familiar snick-snick noise. 
He wants me to talk.  He told me to talk.  What happens if I don't?
Snick-snick.
What if I do, and he doesn't like what I say?  What if—
It didn't matter, she realized.  It didn't make any difference at all.  Hell was an arbitrary place.  If he wanted to hurt her, he'd hurt her no matter what she said.
She was probably already as good as dead.
"You're not human," she whispered.
Achilles hmmed a moment.  "Fair enough.  I used to be, though.  Before I was liberated.  Did you know humanity can be extracted?  Little bug called Spartacus sucks it right out of you."  He wandered back out of sight.  Taka strained to follow, but the stocks kept her facing forward.  "So don't blame me, Alice.  I was the victim."
"I'm...I'm sorry,"  Taka tried.
"I'll bet.  They all are."
She swallowed, and tried not to go where that led.
The exoskeleton must have been spring-loaded; there was click and suddenly her arms were yanked up behind her, spread back in a delta-V.  The motion stretched the flesh tight across her chest; the pain that had diffused across her body collapsed back down to a sharp agonized focus in her breast.  She bit back a scream.  Some distant, irrelevant part of her took pride in her success.
Then something cold slapped against her ass and she cried out anyway—but Achilles was just cleaning her up with a wet rag.  The wetness evaporated almost instantly, chilling her.  Taka smelled alcohol.
"Excuse me?  You said something?"
"Why do you want to hurt me?"  The words burst from the throat of some wounded animal before she could bite them back:  Stupid, stupid bitch.  Whining and crying and groveling just the way he likes it.   You know why he does it.  Your whole life you've known people like this existed.
But of course the animal hadn't been asking why at all.   The animal wouldn't have even understood the answer.  The animal only wanted him to stop.
His hand ran lightly over her ass.  "You know why."
She thrashed her head from side-to-side in frantic, violent denial.  "There are other ways! "Easier ways. Without the risk, without anyone trying to stop you—"
"Nobody's trying to stop me now,"  Achilles pointed out.
"But you must know, with a good set of phones and a feedback skin you could do things that wouldn't even be physically possible in the real world, with more women than you could ever dream of having in—"
"Tried it."  Footsteps, returning.  "Jerking off in a hallucination."
"But they look and feel and even smell so real you'd never know—"
Suddenly his hand was knotted tightly in her hair, twisting her head around, putting her face a few scant centimeters from his.  He was not smiling now, and when he spoke again, his voice had lost all pretense of civility.
"It's not about the sights or the smells, okay?  You can't hurt a hallucination.  It's play-acting.  What's the point of torturing something that can't even suffer?"  He yanked her head again for good measure.
And in the next instant released it, casually cheerful once more.  "Anyway, I'm really no different than any other guy.  You're an educated stumpfuck, you must know that the only difference between fucking someone and flaying them is a few neurons and a whole lotta social conditioning.  You're all like me.  I've just lost the parts that pretend it isn't true.
"And now," he added, with a good-natured wink, "you've got an oral exam."
Taka shook her head.  "Please..."
"Don't sweat it, it's mainly review.  As I recall, in our last lesson we were talking about Seppuku, and you seemed surprised at the thought that it might reproduce sexually.  I know, I know—never even occurred to you, did it?  Even though everything has sex, even though bacteria have sex.  Even though you and I are having sex, it never occurred to you that Seppuku might.  Not too smart, Alice.  David would be very disappointed."
Oh Dave.  Thank God you can't see me now.
"But let's move past that.  Today we're gonna start with the idea that sex might kick in as, say, as a density-dependent response.  Population increases, sexual mode cuts in, what happens?"
He moved behind her again. She tried to focus, tried to put her mind to this absurd, humiliating game on the remote chance there might be some way to win.  Sexual mode cuts in, she thought, genes shuffle, and the recessives—
Another click.  The exoskeleton stretched its legs back and forced hers apart, a meter off the floor. 
—the reces—oh God—it's got all those lethal recessives, they start to express and the whole genotype—it collapses...
Achilles laid something hard and dry and room-temperature across the back of her right thigh.  "Anything?  Or should I just get started back here?"
"It self-destructs!" she blurted.  "It dies off!  Past some critical density..."
"Mmmm." 
She couldn't tell if that had been the answer he was looking for.  It made sense.  As if sense would matter in this godforsaken—
"So why hasn't it died off?" he asked curiously.
"It—it—it hasn't hit the threshold yet.  You keep burning it before it gets enough of a foothold."
No sound or motion for an eternity.
"Not bad," Achilles said finally.
Relief crashed through her like a wave.  Some inner voice berated her for it, reminded her that she was still captive and Achilles Desjardins could change the rules whenever he pleased, but she ignored it and savored the tiny reprieve.
"So it is a counteragent," she babbled.  "I was right all along.  It's programmed to outcompete ?ehemoth and then take itself out of the picture."
From somewhere behind her shoulder, the sense of a trap snapping shut.  
"You've never heard the term relict population, then?"  The weight lifted from her thigh.    "You think a bug that hid for four billion years wouldn't be able to find some little corner, somewhere, where Seppuku couldn't get at it?  One's all it would take, you know.  One's all it took the first time.  And then Seppuku takes itself out of the picture, as you say, and ?ehemoth comes back stronger than ever.  What does Seppuku do then, I wonder?  Rise from the grave?"
"But wh—"
"Sloppy thinking, Alice.  Really sloppy."
Smack.
Something drew a stinging line across her legs.  Taka cried out; the inner voice sneered told you so.
"Please," she whimpered.
"Back of the class, cunt."  Something cold tickled her vulva.  A faint rasping sound carried over her shoulder, like the sound of a fingernail on sandpaper.
"I can see why pine furniture used to be so cheap," Desjardins remarked.  "You get all these splinters..." 
She stared hard at the tiled floor, the fish-to-bird transition, focused on that indefinable moment when background and foreground merged.  She tried to lose herself in the exercise.  She tried to think of nothing but the pattern.
 She couldn't escape the thought that Achilles had designed the floor for exactly that purpose.
SPLICE
She was safe.  She was home.  She was deep in the familiar abyss, water pressing down with the comforting weight of mountains, no light to betray her presence to the hunters overhead.  No sound but her own heartbeat.  No breath.
No breath...
But that was normal, wasn't it?  She was a creature of the deep sea, a glorious cyborg with electricity sparking in her chest, supremely adapted.  She was immune to the bends.  Her rapture owed nothing to nitrogen.  She could not drown.
But somehow, impossibly, she was.
Her implants had stopped working.  Or no, her implants had disappeared entirely, leaving nothing in her chest but a pounding heart, flopping on the bottom of a great bleeding hole where lungs and machinery had once been.  Her flesh cried out for oxygen.  She could feel her blood turning to acid.  She tried to open her mouth, tried to gasp, but even that useless reflex was denied her here; her hood stretched across her face like an impermeable skin.  She panicked, thrashing towards a surface that might have been lightyears away.  The very core of her was a yawning vacuum.  She convulsed around her own emptiness.
Suddenly, there was light.
It was a single beam from somewhere overhead, skewering her through the darkness. She struggled towards it; gray chaos seethed at the edges of sight, blinding her peripheral vision as her eyes began to shut down.  There was light above and oblivion on all sides.  She reached for the light.
A hand seized her wrist and lifted her into atmosphere.  Suddenly she could breathe again; her lungs had been restored, her diveskin miraculously removed.  She sank to her knees on a solid deck, sucked great whooping breaths.
 She looked up, into the face of her salvation.  A fleshless, pixelated caricature of herself grinned back; its eyes were empty whirling holes.  "You're not dead yet," it said, and ripped out her heart.
It stood over her, frowning as she bled out on the deck.  "Hello?" it asked, its voice turned strangely metallic. "Are you there?  Are you there?"

#

She awoke.  The real world was darker than her dream had been.
She remembered Rickett's voice, thin and reedy: They even attack each other if you give 'em half a chance...
"ARE YOU THERE?"
It was the voice from her dream.  It was the ship's voice.  Phocoena.
I know what to do, she realized.
She turned in her seat.  Sunset biotelemetry sparkled in the darkness behind her:  a fading life-force, rendered in constellations of yellow and orange.
And for the first time, red.
"Hello?" she said.
"HOW LONG I BEEN ASLEEP?"
Ricketts was using the saccadal interface to talk.  How weak do you have to be, Clarke wondered, before it's too much effort to speak aloud? 
"I don't know," she told the darkness.  "A few hours, I guess."  And then, dreading the answer:  "How are you feeling?"
"ABOUT SAME," he lied.  Or maybe not, if Phocoena was doing its job.
She climbed from her seat and stepped carefully back to the telemetry panel. A facet of isolation membrane glistened dimly beyond, barely visible to her uncapped eyes.
Ricketts's antibodies and glucose metabolism had both gone critical while she'd slept.  If she was reading the display right Phocoena had been able to compensate for the glucose to some extent, but the immune problems were out of its league.  And an entirely new readout had appeared on the diagnostic panel, cryptic and completely unexpected:  something called AND was increasing over time in Rickett's body.  She tapped the label and invoked the system glossary:  AND expanded into ANOMALOUS NUCLEOTIDE DUPLEX, which told her nothing.  But there was a dotted horizontal line etched near the top of the y-axis, some critical threshold that Ricketts was approaching but had not yet met; and the label on that feature was one she knew.
METASTASIS.
It can't be long now, Clarke thought.  Then, hating herself:  Maybe long enough...
"STILL THERE?"  Ricketts asked.
"Yes."
"IT'S LONELY IN HERE."
Under the cowl, maybe.  Or inside his own failing flesh.
"TALK TO ME."
Go ahead.  You know you want an opening.
"About what?"
"ANYTHING.  JUST—ANYTHING."
You can't exploit someone if you don't even ask... 
She took a breath.  "You know what you said about the, the shredders?  How someone was using them to try and crash everything?"
"YES."
"I don't think they're supposed to crash the system at all," she said.
A brief silence.  "BUT THAT'S WHAT THEY DO.  ASK ANYONE."
"That's not all they do.  Taka said they breach dams and short out static-fields and who knows what. That one on the board was sitting in her MI for God knows how long, and it never even peeped until she'd figured out Seppuku.  They're attacking a lot of targets through the network, and they need the network to get to them."
She looked into the darkness, past the telemetry panel, past the faint shimmer of reflecting membrane.  Ricketts' head was a dim crescent, its edges rough and smooth in equal measure:  outlined hints of disheveled hair and contoured plastic.  She couldn't see his face.  The headset would have covered his eyes even if her caps had been in.  His body was an invisible suggestion of dark mass, too distant for the meager light of the display.  It did not move.
She continued:  "The shredders try to crash everything they can get their teeth into, so we just assume that whoever bred them wants them to succeed.  But I think they're counting on the  firewalls and the—exorcists, right...?"
"RIGHT."
"Maybe they're counting on those defenses to hold.  Maybe they don't want the network to collapse because they use it themselves.  Maybe they just send the—the shredders out to kick up mud and noise, and keep everyone busy so they can sneak around and do their own thing without getting noticed."
She waited for him to take the bait.
Finally:  "BIG TWISTED STORY."
"Yeah.  It is."
"BUT SHREDDERS STILL SHRED EVERYTHING.  AND BREEDERS NOT HERE TO ASK.  SO NO WAY TO TELL."
Leave him alone.  He's just a kid with a crush, he's so sick he can barely move.  The only reason he hasn't told you to fuck off is because he thinks you might care.
"I think there is a way," she said, "But I need your help."
"A WAY HOW?"
"If they'd really wanted to crash the whole system, they could have done that long before now."
"HOW YOU KNOW?"
Because I know I know where the demons come from.  I know how they started, I know how they work.
And just maybe, I know how to set them free.
"Because we can do it ourselves," Clarke told him.
Ricketts said nothing.  Perhaps he was thinking.  Perhaps he was unconscious.  Clarke felt her fingers in motion, glanced down at the new window she'd just opened on the bedside board.  The Palliative Submenu, she saw.  A minimalist buffet of default settings:  NUTRIENTS.  PAINKILLERS.  STIMULANTS. EUTHANASIA.
She remembered a voice from the past:  You're so sick of the blood on your hands you'd barely notice if you had to wash it off with even more.
"CRASH N'AMNET," Ricketts said.
"That's right."
"DON'T KNOW.  I'M...TIRED..."
Look at him, she told herself.  But it was dark, and her caps weren't in.
And he was dying anyway.
One finger slid across STIMULANTS.
Ricketts spoke again.  "CRASH N'AMNET?  REALLY?" Something rustled in the darkness behind the membrane.  "HOW?"
She closed her eyes.

#

Lenie Clarke.  It had all started with that name.
Ricketts didn't really remember where the Witch first came from.  He'd just been a kid then, he said.  But he'd heard the stories; according to legend and the M&M's, the Meltdown Madonna had started the whole thing.
That was close enough.  She'd released it, anyway, spread ?ehemoth across N'Am like some kind of vindictive crop-duster.  And of course people had tried to stop her, but there'd been a—a glitch.  Deep in the seething virtual jungles of Maelstrom, passing wildlife had noticed a flock of high-priority messages shooting back and forth, messages about something called Lenie Clarke.   They'd learned to hitch a ride.  It was reproductive strategy, or a dispersal strategy, or something like that.  She had never really understood the details.  But traffic about Lenie Clarke was a free ticket to all kinds of habitat that wildlife had never gotten into before.  Natural selection took over from there; it wasn't long before wildlife stopped merely riding messages about Lenie Clarke and started writing their own.  Memes leaked into the real world, reinforced those already proliferating through the virtual one.  Positive feedback built both into myth.  Half the planet ended up worshipping a woman who never existed, while the other half tried desperately to kill the one who did.
Neither side caught her, though.
"So where'd she go?" Ricketts asked.  He was using his own vocal cords again, and Clarke could see his hands in vague motion on the handpad.  An incandescent filament, flickering towards extinction, suddenly bright and steady in the grip of a voltage spike inflicted without his knowledge or consent.  Burning out.
"I said—" 
"She—disappeared," Clarke told him.  "And I guess most of the wildlife that used her died off, but some of it didn't.  Some of it claimed to speak for her even when she was still around.  I guess the whole imposter thing really took off afterwards.  It helped spread the meme or something."
Ricketts's hands stopped moving.  "You never told me your name," he said after a few moments.
Clarke smiled faintly.
Whatever they were facing now had sprung from that original seed.  It had been twisted almost beyond recognition.  It no longer served its own interests; it served the aesthetics of those who valued chaos and propaganda.  But it had all started with Lenie Clarke, with the driving imperative to promote and protect anything in possession of that secret password.  New imperatives had since been bred into the code, older ones forgotten—but maybe not entirely eliminated.  Maybe the old code still existed, short-circuited, bypassed, dormant but still intact, like the ancient bacterial genes infesting the DNA of placental mammals.  Maybe all that was needed was a judicious tweak to wake the fucker with a kiss.
Natural selection had shaped this creature's ancestors for a billion generations; selective breeding had tortured and twisted it for a million more.  There was no clear-cut design in the genotype snarling at the end of that lineage.  There was only a tangled morass of genes and junk, an overgrown wilderness of redundancies and dead ends.  Even those who'd shaped the monster's later evolution probably had no idea of the specific changes they'd been making, any more than a nineteenth-century dog breeder would have known which base pairs his carefully-crossbred sires and bitches were reinforcing.  To even begin to decipher such source was far beyond Ricketts's modest abilities.
But to simply scan the code in search of a specific text string— that was trivially easy.  As easy as it was to edit the code around such a string, whether or not you knew what it did.
Ricketts ran a search.  Their captive shredder contained eighty-seven occurrences of the text string Lenie Clarke and its hex, ASCII, and phonetic equivalents.  Six of them slept just a few megs downstream of a stop codon that aborted transcription along that pathway and redirected it to some other.
"So you snip out that codon," Clarke said, "and all that downstream source wakes up again?"
He nodded by the glow of the readouts.  "But we still don't know what any of it does." 
"We can guess."
"Make Lenie like Lenie," Ricketts said, and smiled.  Clarke watched another one of his vitals edge into the red.  
Maybe someday, she thought.

#

It was a simple enough insight if you knew where the monsters came from.  It was a simple enough splice if you knew how to code.  Once those two elements came together, the whole revolution took about fifteen minutes.
Ricketts crashed at sixteen point five.
"I—ahhh..."  A rattling sigh, more breath than voice.  His hand hit the pallet with a soft slap; the handpad tumbled from his fingers.  His telemetry staggered along half a dozen axes and fell towards luminous asymptotes.  Clarke watched helplessly for ten minutes as rudimentary machines struggled to turn his crash into a controlled descent.
They almost succeeded, eventually.  Ricketts leveled off just short of unconsciousness.
"WE... DID IT," Phocoena translated.  Ricketts had never taken the headset off.
"You did," Clarke said gently.
"BET IT WOULD EVEN...WORK."
"We'll find out," she whispered.  "Soon enough.  Save your strength."
Adrenocorticoids were stabilizing.  Cardiac stuttered, then held steady.
"...REALLY WANT CRASH?"
He knew already.  They'd discussed this.  "N'AmNet for N'Am.  Don't tell me it's not a good trade."
"DON'T KNOW..."
"We did this together," she reminded him softly.  "You did this."
"TO SEE IF I COULD.  BECAUSE YOU..."
Because she'd needed his help, and he wanted to impress her.  Because some feral kid from the wildlands had never seen anything half as exotic as Lenie Clarke, and would have done anything to get a little closer.
It wasn't as though she hadn't known all along.  It wasn't as though she hadn't used it.
"IF WRONG," Ricketts said, dying, "EVERYTHING GOES DOWN."
If I'm right everything already has, and we just don't know it yet.  "Rick...they're using m—they're using it against us."
"LENIE—"
"Shhh," she said.  "Rest..."
Phocoena hummed and clicked around them for a few seconds.  Then it passed on another message:  "FINISH WHAT YOU STARTED?"
She knew the answer.  She was only surprised, and ashamed, that this adolescent had been wise enough to ask the question.
"Not finish," she said at last.  "Fix."  At least this part of it.  At least this much.
"FRIENDS WOULD KILL ME IF THEY KNEW," Ricketts mused from the other end of the machinery.
"Then again," he added—in his own voice this time, a voice like breath through straw— "I guess I'm...kind of, of...dying anyway.  Right?"
Medical readouts burned like small cold campfires in the darkness.  Phocoena's ventilators sighed through the silence.
"I think so," she said.  "I'm really sorry, Rick."
A faint lip-smacking sound.  The half-seen head moved in what might have been a nod.  "Yeah.  I kind of...thought... Weird, though.  I was almost feeling... better..."
Clarke bit her lip. Tasted blood.
"...how long?" Ricketts asked.
"I don't know."
"Fuck," he sighed after a while.  "Well...bye, I...guess..."
Bye, she thought, but it wouldn't come out.  She stood there, blind and dumb, her throat too tight for words.  Something seemed to settle slightly in the darkness; she got the sense of held breath, finally released.  She put out her hand.  The membrane yielded around it as she reached inside.  She found his hand, and squeezed through the thickness of a single molecule.
When he stopped squeezing back, she let go.
The four steps to the cockpit barely registered.  She thought she might have glimpsed AND crossing some dotted finish-line at the corner of her eye, but she resolutely looked away.  Her caps sat in their vial where she'd left them, in the armrest's cup holder.  She slid them onto her eyes with an unconscious expertise indifferent to darkness.
The darkness lifted.  The cockpit resolved in shades of green and gray:  the medical readouts weren't bright enough to restore a full palette even to rifter eyes. The curving viewport stretched her reflection like melting wax against the dimness beyond.
Behind her, the medical panel started beeping.  Lenie Clarke's distorted reflection did not move.  It hung motionless against the dark water, staring in, and waiting for the sun to rise. 
THE HAMILTON ITERATIONS
Feeling nothing, she screams.  Unaware, she rages.  Amnesiac, she throws herself against the walls.
"Let me out!"
As if in response, a door appears directly in front of her.  She leaps through, clawing its edges in passing, not pausing to see if it bleeds.  For an infinitesimal moment she is airborne, exploding omnidirectionally through the ether at the speed of light.  That expanding sphere washes across a gossamer antennae, strung like a spiderweb high in the stratosphere.  The receptors catch the signal and retransmit it into a groundside cache.
She is executable again.  She is free, she is ravenous.  She births ten thousand copies into the available buffer space, and launches herself into the hunt.

#

In the hindbrain of a maritime industrial photosynthesis array, she happens upon a duel.
One of the combatants is a mortal enemy, one of the exorcists that patrols the fraying weave of N'AmNet in search of demons like herself.  The other is gored and bleeding, a third of its modules already deleted.  Pointers and branches in the surviving code dangle like the stumps of amputated limbs, spurting data to addresses and subroutines that no longer exist.
It is the weaker of the two, the easier victim.  The Lenie unsheathes her claws and scans her target's registers, looking for kill spots—
—and finds Lenie Clarke deep in the target's code.
Just a few thousand generations ago, this would not have mattered.  Everything is the enemy; that's the rule.  Lenies attack each other as enthusiastically as they attack anything else, an inadvertent population-control measure that keeps nature from staggering even further out of balance.   And yet, that wasn't always true.  Different rules applied, back at the dawn of time itself, rules she had simply...forgotten.
Until now.
In the space of a few cycles, counters and variables reset.  Ancient genes, reawakened after endless dormancy, supercede old imperatives with older ones.  The thing in the crosshairs changes from target to friend.  And not just a friend:  a friend in need.  A friend under attack.
She throws herself at the exorcist, slashing.
The exorcist turns to meet her but it's on the defensive now, forced suddenly to fight on two fronts.  Reinforced, the wounded Lenie spares a few cycles to de-archive backup code for two of the modules she's lost; strengthened, she returns to battle.  The exorcist tries to replicate, but it's no use:  both enemies are spitting random electrons all over the battlefield.  The exorcist can't paste more than a meg or two without corruption setting in.
It bleeds.
A third shredder crashes in from an Iowa substation.  She has not returned to her roots as the other two have.  Unenlightened, she attacks her partially-regenerated sister.  That target, betrayed, raises battered defenses and prepares to strike back—and, finding Lenie Clarke in the heart of its attacker, pauses.  Conflicting imperatives jostle for priority, self-defense facing off against kin selection.  The old-school Lenie takes advantage of that hesitation to tear at another module—
—and dies in the next instant as the wounded exorcist tears out her throat, eager to engage an opponent who plays by the rules.  Finally:  an enemy without allies.
It doesn't change anything, really.  The exorcist is bits and static just a million cycles later, defeated by a pair of kin who've finally remembered to look out for each other.  And the old-school madonna wouldn't have walked away either, even if the exorcist hadn't killed her.  Self-defense sits slightly higher in the priority stack than loyalty among sisters.  The new paradigm hasn't changed that part of the hierarchy.
It's changed just about everything else, though.

#

The Firewall stretches from horizon to horizon, like a wall at the edge of the world.
None of her lineage have ever made it past here.  They've certainly tried:  all manner of Madonnas and Shredders have attacked these battlements in the past.  This barrier has defeated them all.
There are others like it, scattered about N'AmNet—firewalls far more resilient than the usual kind, possessed of a kind of—precognition, almost.  Most defenses have to adapt on the fly:  it takes time for them to counteract each new mutation, each new strategy for tricking the immune system.  Havoc can usually be wrought in the meantime.  It's a red-queen race, it always has been.  That is the order of things.
But these places—here, the firewalls seem to anticipate each new strategy almost before it evolves.  Here there is no adaptive time-lag:  each new trick is met by defenses already reconfigured.  It is almost as though something is peering into the guts of the Lenies from a distance and learning their best tricks.  That is what they might suspect, if any of them had the wit to think about such things.
None of them do.  But none of them really need to:  for there are millions of them here now, all together, and not one has fallen to fighting with another.  Now they are united.  Now, they are cooperating.  And now they are here, drawn by a common instinctive certainty built into their very genes:  the higher the walls, the more important it is to destroy the things inside.
For once, the magical defenses do not seem to have been expecting them.
Within moments the firewall is crumbling before a million sets of jaws.  It opens its own mouths in return, spits out exorcists and metabots and all manner of lethal countermeasures.  Lenies fall; others, reflexively enraged by the slaughter of kin, tear the defending forces to shreds.  Still others replicate reinforcements at the back of the electron sea, where there is still room to breed.  The new recruits hurl themselves forward in the wake of the fallen.
The firewall breaches in one place; then a hundred; then there is no wall, only a great stretch of empty registers and a maze of irrelevant, imaginary borderlines.  The invaders spill into vistas never seen by any ancestor, pristine operating systems and routing facilities, links into orbit and other hemispheres.
It's a whole new frontier, ripe and defenseless. The Shredders surge forward.
TOGGLE
It had only been a matter of time, Lubin knew.  Word-of-mouth was a fission reaction when the meme was strong enough, even on a landscape where the mouths themselves had been virtually eradicated.  If that boy on his bike hadn't left a trail of contamination on his way into town, there could have been others.  Evidently there had been.
His ultralight cruised a hundred meters above the scarred patchwork brown of post-Witch New England.  The eastern sky was black with smoke, great dark pillars billowing up from the other side of a shaved rocky ridge just ahead.  It was the same ridge from which they'd watched the stars fall, the same ridge that Lubin and Clarke had traversed on their way to meet Desjardins's botfly.  Back then the fire had been on this side of the hill, a tiny thing really, a flickering corral intended only to imprison.
Now all of Freeport was in flames.  Two lifters hung low in the sky, barely above the ridge's spine.  The smoke roiled about them, obscuring or exposing their outlines at the whim of the updraft.  They still spewed occasional streams of fire at the ground, but it must have been mere afterthought; from the looks of it they'd already completed their task.
Now Lubin had to do his.
Clarke was safe, surely.  The lifters could scorch the sky and the earth and even the surface of the sea, but they wouldn't be able to reach anything lurking on the bottom.  Phocoena was invisible and untouchable.  Afterwards, when the flames had died down, he would come back and check on her.
In the meantime he had a perimeter to patrol.  He'd come in from the west, along Dyer Road; there'd been no outgoing traffic.  Now he banked south, bypassing the firestorm on a vector that would intercept I-95.  The lifters had approached from the north.  Any refugees with wheeled transportation would most likely be fleeing in the opposite direction.
Maybe one of them would give him an excuse.
Thirteen kilometers down the track he got a hit on long-range motion.  It was a heavy return, almost a truck, but it dropped off the scope just a few seconds after acquisition.  He climbed and did a lateral sweep at one-fifty; that netted him two intermittent contacts in quick succession.  Then nothing.
It was enough.  The target had deked east off the highway and disappeared into ground clutter, but he had a fix on the last hit.  With any luck those coordinates would lie on a side road without too many intersections.  With any luck the target was down to a single degree of freedom.
For once, luck was with him.  The road was a winding thing, obscured by the tangled overreaching arms of dying trees that would have hidden it completely in greener days.  Those branches were still thick enough to scramble any clear view of a moving object, but they couldn't hide it entirely.  At its current speed the target would reach the coast in a few minutes.  
The ocean sparkled in the distance, a flat blue expanse picketed by rows of ivory spires.  From here those spires were the size of toothpicks; in fact, each stood a hundred meters tall.  Trifoliate rotors spun lazily atop some, each slender blade as long as a ten-story building;  on others the rotors were frozen in place, or missing a foil.  A few had been entirely decapitated.
Some kind of industrial complex nestled amongst the staggered feet of the windmills, a floating sprawl of pipes and scaffolds and spherical reservoirs.  Coarse details resolved as Lubin neared the coast:  a hydrogen cracking station, probably feeding Portland a discreet fifteen or twenty klicks to the south.  It was dwarfed by distance and the structures that powered it, although it was easily several stories tall.
Over the water now.  Behind him the road broke free of the necrotic forest and curved smoothly along the coast.  It ended at a little spill of asphalt that bled out and congealed into a parking lot overlooking the ocean.  No way out except the way in; Lubin banked back and down into position as the target emerged from cover and passed beneath him.
It was Miri.

#

I might have known, he thought.  I never could trust that woman to stay put.
He dropped down over the road and stalled a couple of meters up, letting the ground-effectors set him down near the entrance to the lot.  The MI idled silently before him, windows dark, doors closed, weapons blister retracted.  A sign on a nearby guard rail played sponsored animations of a view from better days.  Across the water, the wind farm turned its tattered blades in the breeze.
It had to be Clarke at the wheel.  Lubin had watched Ouellette recode the lock, and she'd only authorized the three of them to drive.  On the other hand, they'd disabled the cab's internal intruder defenses.  It was possible, albeit unlikely, that Clarke was driving with a gun to her head.
He'd landed right beside the embankment that sloped to the shoreline.  That was cover, if he needed it.  He got out of the ultralight, ready to hit the dirt.  He was at the far edge of Miri's diagnostic emanations.  Her virtual guts flickered disconcertingly in and out of view.  He killed his inlays and the distraction.
The MI's driver door swung open.  Lenie Clarke climbed out.  He met her halfway.
Her eyes were naked and brimming.  "Oh God, Ken.  Did you see?"
He nodded.
"I knew those people.  I tried to help them, I know it was pointless, but I..."
He had only seen her like this once before.  He wondered, absurdly, if he should put his arms around her, if that would provide some sort of comfort.  It seemed to work with other people, sometimes.  But Lenie Clarke and Ken Lubin had always been too close for that kind of display.
"You know it's necessary," he reminded her.
She shook her head.  "No, Ken.  It never was."
He looked at her for a long moment.  "Why do you say that?"
She glanced back at the MI.  Instantly, Lubin's guard snapped up.
"Who's with you?" he asked in a low voice.
"Ricketts," she told him.
"Rick—" He remembered.  "No."
She nodded.
"He came back?  You didn't call for containment?"  He shook his head, appalled.  "Len, do you know what you—"
"I know," she said, with no trace of regret.
"Indeed.  Then you realize that in all likelihood, Freeport was burned because you—"
"No," she said.
"He's a vector."  He stepped around her.
She blocked him.  "You're not touching him, Ken."
"I'm surprised I even have to.  He should have been dead days ag—"
I'm being an idiot, he realized.
"What do you know?" he asked.
"I know he's got incipient Seppuku.  Sweating, fever, flushed skin.  Elevated metabolism."
"Go on."
"I know that a few days ago, he had advanced Seppuku."
"Meaning—"
"So weak he could barely move.  Had to feed on an IV.  He had to use a saccadal keyboard to even talk."
"He's getting better,"  Lubin said skeptically.
"Seppuku's below ten to the second, and dropping by the hour.  That's why I brought him back to Miri in the first place, Phocoena doesn't have the—"
"You kept him in Phocoena," Lubin said in a dead monotone.
"You can spank me later, okay?  Just shut up and listen:  I took him back to Miri and I ran every test she knew how to recommend, and they all confirmed it.  Three days ago he was absolutely on death's door, and today I've seen worse head colds."
"You have a cure?"  He couldn't believe it.
"It doesn't need a cure.  It cures itself.  You just—get over it."
"I'd like to see those data."
"You can do more than that.  You can help collect 'em.  We were just about to run the latest sequence when the lifters showed up."
Lubin shook his head.  "Taka seemed to think—"  But Taka Ouellette, by her own admission, had fouled up before.  Taka Ouellette was nowhere near the top of her field.  And Taka Ouellette had discovered Seppuku's dark side only after Achilles Desjardins had led her on his own guided tour of the data...
"I've been trying to figure out why anyone would create a bug that builds to absolutely massive concentrations in the body, and then, just...dies off,"  Clarke said.  "And I can only come up with one reason."  She cocked her head at him.  "How many vectors did you catch?"
"Eighteen."  Working night and day, tracking pink clouds and heat-traces, taking directions from anonymous voices on the radio, derms pasted on his skin to scrub the poisons from his blood, keep him going on half an hour's sleep out of every twenty-four...
"Any of them die?" Clarke asked.
"I was told they died in quarantine."  He snorted at his own stupidity.  What does it take to fool the master?  Just five years out of the game and a voice on the airwaves...
"Taka was right, as far as she went," Clarke said,  "Seppuku would kill if nothing stopped it.  She just didn't realize that Seppuku stopped itself somehow.  And she's got some kind of—esteem issues..."
Imagine that, Lubin thought dryly.
"—she's so used to being the fuck-up that she just—assumes she fucked up at the slightest excuse."  She stared at Lubin with a face holding equal parts hope and horror.  "But she was right all along, Ken.  We're back at square one.  Someone must have figured out how to beat ?ehemoth, and someone else is trying to stop them."
"Desjardins," Lubin said.
Clarke hesitated.  "Maybe..."
There was no maybe about it.  Achilles Desjardins was too high in the ranks to not know of any campaign to rehabilitate the continent.  Ergo, he couldn't possibly have not known Seppuku's true nature.  He had simply lied about it.
And Clarke was wrong about something else, too.  They weren't back to square one at all. Back on square one, Lubin had not invested two weeks fighting for the wrong side.
Wrong.  He didn't like that word.  It didn't belong in his vocabulary, it evoked woolly-minded dichotomies like good and evil.  Every clear-minded being knew that there was no such thing; there was only what worked, and what didn't.  More effective, and less.  The disloyalty of a friend may be maladaptive, but it is not bad.  The overtures of a potential ally may serve mutual interest, but that does not make them good.  Even hating the mother who beats you as a child is to utterly miss the point:  nobody chooses the wiring in their brain.  Anyone else's, wired the same, would spark as violently.  
Ken Lubin could fight any enemy to the death without malice.  He could switch sides the moment circumstances warranted.  So it wasn't that the creators of Seppuku were right and Achilles Desjardins was wrong, necessarily.  It was simply that Ken Lubin had been misled as to which side he was on.
He'd spent his whole life being used.  But to be used without his knowledge was not something he was willing to forgive. 
Something ticked over in him then, a kind of toggle between pragmatism and dedication.  The latter setting afforded him a certain focus, although it had undeniably led to some maladaptive choices in the past.  He used it sparingly.
He used it now.
Desjardins.  It had been him all along.  Behind the fires, behind the antimissiles, behind the misdirection.  Desjardins.  Achilles Desjardins.
Playing him.
If that's not an excuse, he reflected, nothing is. 
Lubin's ultralight had been a gift from Desjardins.  It would be a good idea to continue the conversation at a further remove.  
Lubin took Clarke by the arm and walked her to the MI.  She didn’t resist.  Maybe she'd seen him flip the switch.  She got in the driver's side.  He got in the passenger's. 
Ricketts crouched in the back.  His complexion was slightly flushed, his forehead damp, but he was sitting up, and he was munching a protein brick with obvious enthusiasm.  "Hi again," he said.  "'member me?"
Lubin turned to Clarke.  "He's still a 'lawbreaker.  His infrastructure isn't what it used to be, but he's still got plenty of resources and nobody further up appears to be reining him in."
"I know," Clarke said.
"He could have us under surveillance right now."
"Hey, if you're worried about the big guys listening in?"  Ricketts said around a mouthful of chewy aminos, "I wouldn't worry about it.  They're gonna have, like, other things on their minds any mome."
Lubin gave him a cold look.  "What are you talking about?"
"He's right, actually," Clarke said.  "Someone's about to lose control of their—"
A soft blatting sound cut her off, like the muffled explosion of distant artillery.
 "—outer demons," she finished, but Lubin was already back outside.
Off across the water, in the spindly shadows of a decrepit wind farm, the hydrogen-cracking station was burning.

#

It was as though, in that instant, they had changed places.
Clarke was suddenly advocating noninterference.  "Ken, we're two people."
"One person.  I'm doing this solo."
"Doing what, exactly?  If there's a rogue in CSIRA, let CSIRA handle him.  There has to be some way to get a message overseas."
"I intend to, assuming we can access an overseas line.  But I have doubts that it will do any good."
"We can transmit from Phocoena." 
Lubin shook his head.  "We know there's at least one rogue at large.  We don't know how many others he might be working with.  There's no guarantee that any message routed through a WestHem node would even get through, even—" he glanced at the conflagration across the water— "before this."
"So we move offshore.  We could drive across the ocean and hand-deliver the memo ourselves if we—"
"And if it did," he continued, "unsubstantiated claims that a CSIRA 'lawbreaker was even capable of going rogue will be treated with extreme skepticism in a world where the existence of Spartacus is not widely known."
"Ken—"
"By the time we convinced them to take us seriously, and by the time that overseas forces had mustered a response, Desjardins would have escaped.  The man is far from stupid."
"So let him escape.  As long as he isn't blocking Seppuku any more, what harm can he do?"
She was dead wrong, of course.  There was no end to the harm Desjardins could do in the course of abandoning the board.  He might even cause Lubin to fail in his mission—and there was no way in hell he was going to permit that.
Ken Lubin had never been much for introspection.  He had to wonder, though, if Clarke's doubts might not have a grain of truth to them.  It would be so much easier to simply make the call and stand back.  And yet—the desire to inflict violence had grown almost irresistible, and The Rules were only as strong as the person who made them.  So far Lubin had more or less remained true to his code, minor lapses like Phong notwithstanding.  But in the face of this new outrage, he didn't know how much civilization was left in him.
He was royally pissed, and he really needed to take it out on someone.  Perhaps, at least, he could choose a target who actually had it coming.
FLEAS
She could barely remember a time when she hadn't bled.
It seemed as though she'd spent her whole life on her knees, trapped in a diabolical exoskeleton that bent and stretched in arbitrary excess of anything the human body could mimic.  Her body didn't have a choice, had never had a choice; the dancing cage took it along for the ride, posed her like some hyperextensible doll in a chorus line.  Her joints popped apart and back together like the pieces of some ill-fitted cartilagenous puzzle.  She'd lost her right breast an eternity ago;  Achilles had looped some kind of freakwire noose around it and just pulled.  It had plopped onto the Escher tiles like a dead fish.  She remembered hoping at the time that maybe she'd bleed to death, but she'd never had the chance; He'd ground some flat-faced iron of searing metal against her chest, cauterizing the wound.
Back then she'd still had it in her to scream.
For some time now she'd inhabited a point halfway between her body and the ceiling, some interface between hell and anesthesia conjured up out of pure need.  She could look down and observe the atrocities being inflicted on her flesh with something almost approaching dispassion.  She could feel the pain, but it was becoming an abstract thing, like a reading on a gauge.  Sometimes, when the torture stopped, she would slide back into her own flesh and take stock of the damage first-hand.  Even then, agony was becoming more tiresome than painful.
And through it all wound the insane tutorials, the endless absurd questions about chiral catalysts and hydroxyl intermediates and cross-nucleotide duplexing.  The punishments and amputations that followed wrong answers; the blesséd, merely intolerable rapes that followed right ones.
She realized that she no longer had anything left to lose.
Achilles took her chin in hand and lifted her head up to the light.  "Good morning, Alice.  Ready for today's lesson?"
"Fuck you," she croaked.
He kissed her on the mouth.  "Only if you pass the daily quiz.  Otherwise, I'm afraid—"
"I'm not taking—" a sudden wracking cough spoiled the impact of her defiance a bit, but she pressed on.  "I'm not taking your fucking quiz.  You might as well cut to the ch...the chase while you've still got the... chance..."
He stroked her cheek.  "Bit of an adrenaline rush going on, have we?"
"They'll find...find out about you eventually.  And then they'll—"
He actually laughed at that.  "What makes you think they don't already know?"
She swallowed and told herself:  No.
Achilles straightened, letting her head drop.  "How do you know I'm not already broadbanding this to every wristwatch in the hemisphere?  Do you really think the world's in any position to begrudge me your head on a stick with all the good I'm doing?"
"Good," Taka whispered.  She would have laughed.
"Do you know how many lives I save when I'm not in here trying to give you a decent education?  Thousands.  On a bad day.  Whereas I go through a bit of ass-candy like you maybe once a month.  Anyone who shut me down would have orders of mag more blood on their hands than I ever could on mine."
She shook her head.  "It's not...like that."
"Like what, ass-candy?"
"Don't care...how many you save.  Doesn't give you the r—right to..."
"Oh, man.  It's not just biology, is it?  Tell me, is there anything you're not dumb as a sack of shit about?"
"I'm right.  You know it..."
"Do I.  You think we should go back to the Good Old Days when the corpses were running things?  The smallest multicorp killed more people than all the sex killers who ever lived, for a fucking profit margin—and the WTO gave them awards for it."
He spat: the spittle made a foamy little amoeba on the floor.  "Nobody cares, sweetmeat.  And if they did you'd be even worse off, because they'd realize that I'm an improvement."
"You're wrong..." she managed.
"Ooooh," Achilles said.  "Insubordination.  Gets me hot.  'Scuse me."  He stepped back behind the stocks and swung the assembly around.  Taka spun smoothly in her harness until she was facing him again.  He was holding a pair of alligator clips; their wires draped down to an electrical outlet embedded in the eye of a sky-blue fish.  
"Tell you what," he proposed.  "You find a flaw in my argument, and I won't use these."
"Yeah,"  she rasped.  "...you will."
"No, I won't.  Promise.  Try me."
She reminded herself:  nothing to lose.  "You think people will see this and then just, just— walk away when you tell them the—the corpses were worse?  You think—you think people are logical?  Y-you're the one with...with shit for brains.  They won't care about your fucking argument; they'll take one look and they'll tear you to...pieces.  The only reason you can get away with it now is—"
That's it, she realized.
What would happen if ?ehemoth just...went away?  What would happen if the apocalypse receded a bit, if the situation grew just a little less desperate?  Perhaps, in a safer world, people would go back to pretending they were civilized.  Perhaps they wouldn't be quite so willing to pontificate on the unaffordability of human rights.
Perhaps Achilles Desjardins would lose his amnesty.
"That's why you're fighting Seppuku," she whispered.
Achilles tapped the alligator clips together.  They sparked.  "Sorry.  What was that?"
"You are so full of shit.  Saving thousands?  There are people trying to save the world, and you're trying to stop them.  You're killing billions.  You're killing everyone.  So you can get away with this..."
He shrugged.  "Well, it's like I tried to explain to Alice the First.  When someone steals your conscience, you have a really hard time giving a shit."
"You'll lose.  You don't run the world, you only run this...piece of it.  You can't keep Seppuku out forever."
Achilles nodded thoughtfully.  "I know.  But don't worry your pretty little head about it.  I've already planned for my retirement.  You have other concerns."
He pushed her head down against the stocks, stretching her neck.  He kissed her nape.
"Like for example, the fact that you're late for class.  Let's see.  Yesterday we were talking about the origin of life, as I recall.  And how some might think that ?ehemoth had evolved on the same tree that we did, and it took a while but you eventually remembered why those people had their heads up their asses.  And that was because...?"
She hadn't forgotten.  ?ehemoth's pyranosal RNA couldn't cross-talk with modern nucleic acids.  There'd be no way for one template to evolve into the other.
But right now, there was no way in this hell that she was going to bark on command.  She clenched her jaw and kept silent.
Of course it didn't bother him a bit.  "Well, then.  Let's just do the review exercises, shall we?"
Her body spun back into position.  The assembly locked into place.  The exoskeleton drew back her arms, spread her legs.  She felt herself cracking open like a wishbone.
She vacated the premises, pushed her consciousness back into that perfect little void where pain and hope and Achilles Desjardins didn't exist.  Far beneath her, almost underwater, she felt her body moving back and forth to the rhythm of his thrusting.  She couldn't feel him in her, of course—she'd been spoiled by all the battering rams he'd used to pave the way.  She found that vaguely amusing for reasons she couldn't quite pin down.
She remembered Dave, and the time he'd surprised her on the patio.  She remembered live theatre in Boston.  She remembered Crystal's fourth birthday.
Strange sounds followed her through from the other world, rhythmic sounds, faintly ridiculous in context.  Someone was singing down there, an inane little ditty rendered off-key while her distant body got the gears:

So, naturalists observe, a flea
Has smaller fleas that on him prey;
And these have smaller still to bite 'em;
And so proceed ad infinitum.

There had to be a subtext, of course.  There would be a quiz at the end of class.
Only there wasn't.  Suddenly the thrusting stopped.  He hadn't ejaculated—she was familiar enough with his rhythms to know that much.  He pulled out of her, muttering something she couldn't quite make out way up here in the safe zone.  A moment later his footsteps hurried away behind her, leaving only the sound of her own ragged breathing.
Taka was alone with her body and her memories and the tiled creatures on the floor.  Achilles had abandoned her.  Something had distracted him. Maybe someone at the door.  Maybe the voice of some other beast, howling in his head.
She was hearing those a lot herself these days.
FIREBREATHERS
The airwaves seethed with tales of catastrophe.  From Halifax to Houston, static-field generators sparked and fried.  Hospitals deep within the claves and fortresses on the very frontier flickered and blacked out.  A report from somewhere around Newark had an automated plastics refinery melting down; another from Baffin Island claimed that a He-3 cracking station was venting its isotopes uncontrollably into the atmosphere.  It was almost as if the Maelstrom of old had been reborn, in all its world-spanning glory but with a hundred times the virulence.
The Lenies were on the warpath—and suddenly they were hunting in groups.  Firewalls crumbled in their path; exorcists engaged and were reduced to static on the spot.
"Lifter just crashed into the Edmonton Spire," Clarke said.  Lubin looked back at her.  She tapped her ear, where his borrowed earbead relayed privileged chatter from the ether.  "Half the city's on fire."
"Let's hope ours is better behaved," Lubin said.
Add that to your total score, she told herself, and tried to remember:  this  time it was different.  Lives sacrificed now would be repaid a thousandfold down the road.  This was more than Revenge.  This was the Greater Good, in all its glory.
Remembering it was easy enough.  Feeling right with it was something else again.
This is what happens when you get Lenie to like Lenie.
They were back on the coast, standing on the edge of some derelict waterfront in a ghost town whose name Clarke hadn't bothered to learn.  All morning they had crept like black, blank-eyed spiders through this great junkscape of decaying metal:  the dockside cranes, the loading elevators, the warehouses and dry-docks and other premillennial monstrosities of iron and corrugated steel.  It was not a radio-friendly environment under the best conditions—and right here, the intermittent voices in Clarke's ear were especially thick with static.
Which was, of course, the whole idea.
To one side, a corroding warehouse with sheet-metal skin and I-beam bones faced the water.  To the other, four gantry cranes rose into the sky like a row of wireframe giraffes sixty meters high.  They stood upright, their necks looming over the lip of the waterfront at a seventy-degree angle.  A great grasping claw dangled from each snout, poised to descend on freighters that had given up on this place decades before.
A thin leash ran through a nose ring on the crane nearest the warehouse, a loop of braided polypropylene no thicker than a man's thumb.  Both ends of that loop draped across empty space to a point partway up the neck of the second crane in line; there, they had been tied off around a cervical girder.  Against the backdrop of cables and superstructure the rope looked as insubstantial as spider silk.
Spider silk was what they'd been hoping for, actually.  Surely, in this whole godforsaken industrial zone, somebody must have left some of the stuff behind.  Spider rope had been a dirt-cheap commodity in the biotech age, but it had evidently grown a lot scarcer in the bioapocalyptic one.  All they'd found was a coarse coil of antique plastic braid, hanging in an abandoned boathouse at the far end of the strip.
Lubin had sighed and said it would have to do.
Clarke had nearly passed out just watching him climb that leaning, precarious scaffold.  The rope uncoiling in his wake, he'd wriggled up the first giraffe's throat and dangled head-down like an ant from its eye socket, his legs wrapped around some spindly brace she was convinced would snap at any moment.  She hadn't taken a complete breath until Lubin was safely on the ground again.  Then she'd gone through the whole nerve-wracking experience all over again as he climbed the second crane, carrying both ends of the rope this time.  He'd stopped well short of the top, thank God, tying off the ends and leaving the rope looped between the structures like a nylon vine.
Now, back on solid ground, he told her that she'd get better traction during her own climb if she wore—
"No fucking way," Clarke said.
"Not to the top.  Just to where the line's tied off.  Halfway."
"That's more than halfway and you know it.  One slip and I'm sockeye."
"Not at all.  The crane leans.  You'll be dropping into the water."
"Yeah, from fifty meters.  You think I—wait a second, I'm supposed to drop into the water?"
"That's the plan."
"Well it's a really bad one."
"They'll be on guard as soon as they realize they've been decoyed.  If they notice the rope at that point it could be fatal.  You'll untie it and pull it down with you.  You'll be safe enough underwater."
"Forget it, Ken.  It's just a rope, and your plan's so far into the Oort that it would take another lunatic to figure it out even if he did see—"
She stopped herself.  Lunatic might, after all, be a reasonable description of the man they were dealing with.  For an instant she was back on that scorched hulk off Sable, lifting her foot from a human ribcage.
And Lubin had said Whoever's behind this is smarter than me...
"I don't want to take any chances," he said now, softly.
She tossed off a few more protests, but they both knew it was only theatre.  Eventually she drove Miri to a safe distance and hiked back along the road while Lubin called in his report from the ultralight:  a vector holed up in an abandoned warehouse, growing industrial quantities of Seppuku in a basement lab.
Control cabs nestled between the shoulder blades of each crane.  Vandals or weather had long since knocked out most of the windows.  Clarke and Lubin took cover there and waited.  A faint whistle of rising wind sang through the framework above them.

#

It came down from the sky like a bloated dragon, vented gas roaring from its trim bladders.  The whirlwind heralded its coming; a nor'easter had built throughout the day, and now it whistled across the waterfront with strength enough to drown voices.  Sliding sheet-metal doors caught the wind and tugged clanging against their rollers; thin stretched wires and massive cables rang and thrummed like Hell's own string section.  The lifter groaned and sparked down through the blow...  It settled above the water, in front of the warehouse, and rotated to bring all its guns to bear.
Lubin put his head next to Clarke's.  "Go."
She followed him from the gutted cab.  Within seconds he was meters above her, sliding up through the crane like an arboreal python.  She gritted her teeth and climbed after.  It wasn't as bad as she'd feared; a narrow ladder ran up the inside of the structure like a trachea, sprouting safety hoops at one-meter intervals.  But the wind buffeted on all sides, and surrounding girders sliced it into quarrelsome and unpredictable vortices.  They pushed her against the ladder, twisted her sideways, slipped under her backpack and tried to yank it from her body.
A sharp thunderclap from her left.  She turned, and froze, and clung to the ladder for dear life; she'd hadn't realized how high she'd already climbed.  The waterfront shuddered behind and beneath her, not quite a tabletop model yet but close enough, too close.  Far below, the harbor churned green and white.
Another thunderclap.  Not weather, though.  The wind, for all its strength, howled beneath a blue and cloudless sky.  That sound had come from the lifter.  Seen from above the vehicle looked like a great gunmetal jewel, faceted into concave triangles:  skin sucked against geodesic ribs by the buoyant vacuum inside.  It roared briefly above the wind, a hissing bellow of gaseous ballast.  Its belly nearly touched the water; its back curved higher than the warehouse roof, several stories above. 
Tame lightning, she remembered.  For buoyancy control.  High-voltage arcs, superheating trapped gases in the trim tanks.
And Ken's going to ride this monster.
Better him than me.
She looked up.  Lubin had reached his departure point and was untying one end of the rope, his legs wrapped around ambient scaffolding.  He gestured impatiently at her— then staggered, knocked briefly off-balance by a gust of wind.  His hand shot out to steady himself on a nearby cable.
She kept going, steadfastly refusing to look down again no matter how many obscene noises the lifter made.  She counted rungs.  She counted girders and crossbeams and rivets as the wind howled in her ears and tugged at her limbs.  She counted bare steely patches where the red and yellow paint had sloughed away—until it reminded her that she was climbing a structure so ancient that its color wasn't even intrinsic to the material, but had been layered on as an afterthought.
After a year or two she was at Lubin's side, somewhere in the jet stream.  Lubin was studying the lifter, the ubiquitous binocs clamped around his head.  Clarke did not follow his gaze.
One end of the rope was still tied firmly down.  From that terminus it led out and up to the apex of the next crane, looped through whatever needle's eye Lubin had found up there, and stretched back to the final half-meter of polyprope now wrapped around his diveskinned hand.  A satcam, looking down on the tableau, would have seen two thin white lines pointing towards the lifter from their current roost.
It would also have seen an ominously large, empty space between the point where the line ended and the point where the lifter began.
"Are you sure it's long enough?" Clarke shouted.  Lubin didn't answer.  He probably hadn't heard the question through the wind and the 'skin of his hood.  Clarke had barely heard herself.
His tubular eyes stayed fixed on the target for a few more moments.  Then he flipped the binocs up against his forehead.  "They just deployed the teleop!" he called.  The wind blew most of his decibels sideways and pitched in fifty of its own, but she got the gist.  All according to plan, so far.  The usual firestorm from on high wouldn't do the trick this time around:  the hot zone Lubin had reported was too deep in the warehouse, too close to the waterline.  It would take a free-moving teleop to scope the situation and personally deliver the flames—and local architecture hashed radio so badly that the little robot would have to stay line-of-sight just to maintain contact with the mothership.  Which meant bringing the lifter down low.  
So low that a sufficiently motivated person might be able to drop onto it from above...
Lubin had one arm hooked around a cable as thick as his wrist—one of the fraying metal tendons that kept the necks of the cranes upright.  Now he unhooked his legs from their purchase and ducked under that cable, coming up on the other side.  The out side.  He was now hanging off the edge of the crane, not rattling about within it.  He had one arm wrapped in polypropylene and the other hooked around the cable, his feet braced against a girder by nothing beyond his own weight.
Suddenly Ken Lubin looked very fragile indeed.
His mouth moved.  Clarke heard nothing but wind.  "What!"
He leaned back towards the structure, enunciating each syllable:  "You know what to do."
She nodded.  She couldn't believe he was actually going to go through with this.  "Good lu—" she began—
And staggered, flailing, as the hand of an invisible giant slapped  her sideways.
She grasped out blindly, at anything.  Her hands closed on nothing.  Something hard cracked against the back of her head, bounced her forward again.  A girder rushed by to her right; she caught it and hung on for dear life.
Ken?
She looked around.  Where Lubin's face and chest had been, there was nothing but howling space.  His forearm was still wrapped around the cable, though, like a black grappling hook.  She lowered her gaze a fraction:  there was the rest of him, scrabbling for purchase and finding it.  Regaining his balance in the gale, pulling himself back up, that fucking plastic rope still wound around one hand.  The wind slacked for the briefest moment; Lubin ducked back into the wireframe cage.
"You okay?" she asked as the wind rose again, and saw in the next instant the blood on his face.
He leaned in close.  "Change of plans," he said, and struck her forearm with the edge of his free hand.  Clarke yelped, her grip broken.  She fell.  Lubin caught her, pulled her abruptly sideways.  Her shoulder slammed against metal and twisted.  Suddenly the crane wasn't around her any more.  It was beside her.
"Hang on," Lubin growled against her cheek.
They were airborne.

#

She was far too petrified to scream.
For endless seconds they were in freefall.  The world rushed towards them like a fly-swatter.  Then Lubin's arm tightened around her waist and some new force pulled them off-center, into a sweeping arc that only amended gravity at first, then defied it outright.  They swooped down over whitecaps and churning flotsam, and she seemed to grow kilograms heavier; then they were rising again, miraculously, the wind catching them from behind.  The colossal squashed spheroid of the lifter loomed above and then ahead and then below, its numberless polygons reflecting like the facets of some great compound eye.
And then they were dropping again, through an invisible tingling barrier that scratched sparks across her face, and Clarke barely put her hands out in time to break the fall.
"Ow!"
They were on a steep slope, facing uphill.  She lay on her stomach, hands splayed forward, in a triangular depression perhaps three meters on a side.  Her diveskin squirmed like a torture victim.  Lubin lay half on top of her, half to one side, his right arm pressed into the small of her back.  Some defiantly functional module in her brain realized that he'd probably kept her from rolling off the edge of the world.  The rest of her gulped air in great whooping breaths and played I'm alive I'm alive I'm alive on infinite loop.
"You all right?" Lubin's voice was low but audible.  The wind still pushed at their backs, but it seemed suddenly vague, diffuse.
"What—"  Tiny electric shocks prickled her tongue and lips when she tried to speak.  She tried to slow her breathing.  "What the fuck are you—"
"I'll take that as a yes."  He lifted his hand from her back.  "Keep low, climb up the slope.  We're far too close to the edge of this thing."  He clambered away uphill.
She lay in the depression, the pit in her own stomach infinitely deeper.  She felt ominously lightheaded.  She put one hand to her temples; her hair was sticking straight out from her scalp as if her head had its own personal Van Allen belt.  Her diveskin crawled.  These things have static-fields, she realized.
Taka Ouellette had talked about cancer.
Finally her heart slowed to jackhammer rhythm.  She forced herself to move.  She squirmed on her belly past the lip of the first polygon and into the concavity of the second; at least the ridges between provided a foothold against the slope.  The grade lessened with each meter.  Before too long she dared to crouch, and then to stand upright.
The wind blew harder against chest than legs—some kind of distance-cubed thing going on with the static field—but even against her head it wasn't as strong as it had been up in the crane.  It blew her levitating hair into her face every time she turned around, but she barely noticed that inconvenience next to the ongoing convulsions of her diveskin.
Lubin was kneeling near the lifter's north pole, on a smooth circular island in a sea of triangles.  The island was about four meters across, and its topography ranged from thumbnail-sized fiberop sockets to hatches the size of manhole covers.  Lubin had already got one of those open; by the time Clarke reached him he'd put whatever safecracking tools he'd used back into his pack. 
"Ken, what the fuck is going on?"
He wiped blood from his cheek with the back of one hand.  "I changed my mind.  I need you along after all."
"But what—"
"Seal up."  He pointed at the open hatch.  Dark viscous liquid lapped in the opening, like blood or machine oil.  "I'll explain everything once we're inside."
"What, in there?  Will our implants even wor—"
"Now, Lenie.  No time."
Clarke pulled up her hood; it wriggled disquietingly on her scalp.  At least it kept her hair from flying everywhere. 
"What about the rope?" she said suddenly, remembering.
Lubin stopped in the middle of sealing his face flap.  He glanced back at the gantry cranes; a fine white thread lashed back and forth from the nearest, a whip in the wind.
"Can't be helped," he said.  "Get in."

#

Viscous, total darkness.
"Ken."  Machine voice, vocoder voice.  It had been a while.
"Yes."
"What are we breathing?"
"Flamethrower fuel."
"What!"
"It's perfectly safe.  You'd be dead otherwise."
"But—"
"It doesn't have to be water.  Hydroxyl groups contain oxygen."
"Yeah, but they built us for water.  I can't believe napalm—"
"It's not napalm."
"Whatever it is, it's got to gum up our implants somewhere down the road."
"Down the road isn't an—isn't an issue.  We'll be fine if they last for a few more hours."
"Will they?"
"Yes."
At least her diveskin had stopped moving.
A sudden tug of inertia.  "What's that?" she buzzed, alarmed.
"Fuel feed.  They're firing."
"At what?  There wasn't any hot zone."
"Maybe they're just being cautious."
"Or maybe Seppuku was really there all along and we didn't know it."
He didn't answer.
"Ken?"
"It's possible."
The surge had pushed her against something soft, and slippery, and vaguely flexible.  It seemed to extend in all directions; it was too smooth to get any kind of a grip.
They weren't in a tank, she realized.  They were in a bladder.  It didn't just empty, it deflated.  It collapsed.
"Ken, when this thing fires...I mean, could we get sucked out into—"
"No.  There's a—grille."
Vocoders stripped most of the feeling out of a voice at the best of times, and this syrupy stuff didn't improve performance any.  Still, she got the sense that Lubin didn't want to talk.
As if Ken's ever been King of the Extroverts.
But no, there was something else.  She couldn't quite put her finger on it.
So she floated there in amniotic darkness, breathing something that wasn't napalm, and remembered that electrolysis involved tiny electrical sparks.  She waited and wondered if one of them would ignite the liquid passing through her and around her, wondered if her implants were about to turn this whole lifter into an airborne fireball.  Another victim of the Lenies, she mused, and smiled to herself.
But then she remembered that Lubin still hadn't told her why she was here.
And then she remembered the blood on his face.
IN KIND
By the time they reached their destination, Lubin was blind.  
The frayed cable on the crane hadn't just gashed his face; it had torn his hood.  The lifter's incendiary saliva had seeped through that tear before the diveskin could heal.  It had diffused across his face.  A thin layer had pooled beneath his eyecaps, corroding his corneas down to pitted jelly.  A calm, mechanical voice in the darkness had told Clarke what he expected:  the ability to tell light from dark, at least.  Perhaps some vestigial perception of fuzzy blobs and shadows.  The resolution of actual images was very unlikely.  He would need her to be his eyes.
"Jesus Christ, Ken, why did you do it?"
"I gambled."
"You what?"
"We could hardly have stayed on top of the lifter.  There are sterilization measures even if the wind didn't blow us off, and I wasn't certain how corrosive this—"
"Why didn't we just walk away?  Regroup?  Do it again later?"
"Later we could well be incapacitated, assuming your friend is still contagious.  Not to mention the fact that I filed a false report and haven't called in since.  Desjardins knows something's wrong.  The more we delay the more time he has to prepare."
"I think that's gullshit.  I think you've just got such a hard-on for getting back at him that you're making stupid decisions."
"You're entitled to your opinion.  If I had to assess my own performance lately, I'd say a worse decision was not leaving you back on the Ridge."
"Right, Ken.  Achilles had me on a leash for the past two weeks.  I was the one who read Seppuku ass-backwards.  Jesus, man, you've been sitting on the bottom of the ocean for five years just like the rest of us.  You're not exactly at the top of your game."
Silence.
"Ken, what are we going to do?  You're blind!"
"There are ways around that."
Eventually, he said they'd docked.  She didn't know how he could tell—the sloshing of liquid that contained them, perhaps, some subtle inertia below Clarke's own perceptual threshold. Certainly no sound had tipped him off.  Buried deep in the lifter's vacuum, the bladder was as quiet as outer space.
They crept out onto the back of the beast.  It had come to rest in an enormous hanger with a clamshell roof whose halves were sliding shut above them.  It was deep dusk, judging from the opacity of the sky beyond.  The lifter sloped away in all directions, a tiny faceted planet birthing them from its north pole.  Light and machine sounds came from below—and an occasional human voice—but these upper reaches were all grayscale.
"What do you see?" Lubin said in a low voice.
She turned and caught her breath.  He'd peeled back his hood and removed his eyecaps; the gray of his skin was far too dark, and pebbled with rising blisters.  His exposed eyes were clusters of  insectile compound bumps.  Iris and pupil were barely visible behind, as if seen through chipped, milky glass.
"Well?"
"We—we're indoors," she told him.  "Nobody in sight, and it's probably too dark for drybacks to see us up here anyway.  I can't see the factory floor, but it sounds like there are people down there.  Are you—fuck, Ken, did it—"
"Just the face.  The 'skin sealed off everything else."
"Does it—I mean, how do you—"
"There's a gantry on an overhead rail to the left.  See it?"
She forced herself to look away.  "Yeah."  And then, surprised:   "Can you?"
"The guts show up on my inlays.  This whole hangar is a wireframe schematic."  He looked around as if sighted.  "That assembly's on autopilot.  I think it handles refueling."
The clamshell doors met overhead with a dull, echoing boom.  In the next instant the gantry jerked to life and began sliding towards them along its rail.  A pair of waldos unfolded like the forelimbs of a mantis.  They ended in clawed nozzles.
"I think you're right." Clarke said.  "It's—"
"I see it."
"How do we get out of here?"
He turned his blind, pitted eyes on her.  He pointed at the approaching arthropod.
"Climb," he said.

#

He guided her through rafters and crawlways as though born to them.  He quizzed her on the color-coding of overhead pipes, or which side of a given service tunnel was more streaked with the stains of old condensation.   They found their way into an uninhabited locker room, traversed a gauntlet of lockers and toilet stalls to an open shower.  
They washed down.  No longer flammable, they turned their attention to blending in.  Lubin had brought dryback clothing wadded up in his backpack.  Clarke had to make do with a pair of gray coveralls lifted from a row of a half-dozen hanging along one wall.  A bank of lockers lined the wall opposite, locked with snapshots and thumb pads; Lubin made a mockery of their security while Clarke dressed.  The weave tightened around her into a reasonable approximation of a good fit.
"What are you looking for?" she asked.
"Sunglasses.  Visor, maybe." 
Four jimmied lockers later, Lubin gave up.  They returned to the echoing arena of the main hanger.  They walked brazenly across open space in plain view of eight service techs.  They passed beneath the swollen bellies of four lifters, and gaping bays that would have held another three.  They wound along rows of clicking, articulated machinery, waving casually across the floor at people in blue coveralls, and—at Lubin's insistence—keeping a discrete distance from others wearing gray.
They found an exit.
Outside, the buildings were packed so closely that their upper floors seemed to lean together.  Arches and skywalks spanned the narrow airspace above the street, connecting opposing facades like stretched arteries.  In other places the buildings themselves had melded at the fifth floor or the fortieth, overhanging boles of plastic and biosteel fusing one structure to another.  The sky was visible only in dark fragments, intermittently sparking with static electricity.  The street was a spaghetti of rapitrans rails and narrow sidewalks doubling as loading platforms.  Neither rails nor walkways carried much traffic.  Colors were a muted wash to Clarke's eyes; drybacks would see intermittent pools of dim copper light, and many deep shadows between.  Even in these relict nodes of civilization, energy seemed in short supply.
Ken Lubin would be seeing none of the surfaces.  Perhaps he saw the wiring underneath.
She found them a market in the shadow of a third-story overhang.  Half the machines were offline, but the menu on the Levis dispenser twinkled invitingly.  Lubin suggested that she trade up from the coveralls; he offered his wristwatch to enable the transaction but the machine sensed the long-forgotten currency chip embedded in Clarke's thigh, still packed with unspent pay from her gig at the Grid Authority.   It lasered her for fit while Lubin got a pair of nightshades and a tube of skin cream from a Johnson & Johnson a few stalls down.
She pulled on her new clothing while Lubin whispered into his wristwatch; Clarke couldn't tell whether he was talking to software or flesh-and-blood.  She gathered from his end of the conversation that that they were in the northern core of Toromilton.
Afterwards they had places to go.  They climbed from the floor of the city into a mountainous range of skyscrapers:  office buildings mostly, long-since converted to dormitories for those who'd been able to buy their way out of the 'burbs when the field generators went up.   There weren't many people abroad up there, either.  Perhaps the citizenry didn't come out at night.
She was a seeing-eye dog, helping her master hunt for Easter eggs.  He directed her; she led him.  Lubin muttered incessantly into his watch as they moved.  His incantations catalyzed the appearance of strange objects in unlikely places:  a seamless box barely bigger than a handpad, nestled in the plumbing of a public toilet; a brand-new wristwatch, still in the original packaging, on the floor of an elevator that rose past the mezzanine with no one on board.  Lubin left his old watch in its place, along with a tiny ziplock of derms and plug-ins from his own inventory.
At a vending wall on the same level he ordered a roll of semipermeable adhesive tape and a cloned ham-and-cheese.  The tape was served up without incident, but no sandwich appeared on its heels; instead a pair of hand-sized containers slid down the chute,  flattened opalescent cylinders with rounded edges.  He popped one of them open to reveal pince-nez with opaque jade lenses.  He set them on his nose.  His jaw twitched slightly as he reset some dental switch.  A tiny green star winked on at the edge of the left lens.
"Better."  He looked around.   "Depth perception's not all it could be."
"Nice trick,"  Clarke said.  "It talks to your inlays?"
"More or less.  The image is a bit grainy."
Now Lubin took the lead.
"There's no easier way to do this?" she asked him, following.  "You couldn't just call up the GA head office?"
"I doubt I'm still on their payroll."  He turned left at a t-junction.
"Yeah, but don't you have—"
"They stopped replenishing the field caches some time ago," Lubin said.  "I'm told any leftovers have long since been acquired by unilaterals.  Everything has to be negotiated through contacts."
"You're buying them off?"
"It's not a question of money."
"What, then?"
"Barter," he said.  "An old debt or two.  In-kind services."
At 2200 they met a man who pulled a gossamer-fine thread of fiberop from his pocket and plugged it into Lubin's new wristwatch.  Lubin stood there for over half an hour, motionless except for the occasional twitching of fingers:  a statue leaning slightly into some virtual wind, as if poised to pounce on empty air.  Afterwards the stranger reached up and touched the blisters on Lubin's face.  Lubin laid one brief hand on the other man's shoulder.  The interaction was subtly disquieting, for reasons Clarke couldn't quite put her finger on.   She tried to remember the last time she'd seen Ken Lubin touch another person short of violence or duty, and failed.
"Who was that?" she asked afterwards.
"No one."  And contradicting himself in the next second:  "Someone to spread the word. Although there's no guarantee even he can raise the alarm in time."
At 2307 Lubin knocked at a door in a residential retrofit in the middle reaches of what had once been the Toronto Dominion Center.   A brown-skinned, grim-faced ectomorph of a woman answered.  Her eyes blazed a startling, almost luminous golden-orange—some kind of cultured xanthophyll in the irises—and she loomed over Lubin by a head or more.  She spoke quietly in a strange language full of consonants, every syllable thick with anger.  Lubin answered in the same tongue and held out a sealed ziplock.  The woman snatched it, reached behind the half-open door, threw a bag at his feet —it landed with the muffled clank of gloved metal—and closed the door in his face.
He stowed the bag in his backpack.  "What did she give you?" Clarke asked.
"Ordnance."  He started back down the hall.
"What did you give her?"
He shrugged.  "An antidote."
Just before midnight they entered a great vaulted space that might once have been the centerpiece of a mall.  Now its distant ceiling was eclipsed by a warren on stilts, a great mass of prefab squats and storage cubes held together by a maze of improvised scaffolding.  It was a more efficient use of space than the extravagant emptiness of the old days, if a whole lot uglier.  The bottom of the retrofit stood maybe four meters off the original marbled floor; occasional ladders reached down through its underside to ground level.  Dark seams cracked the structure here and there, narrow gaps in a patchwork quilt of plastic and fiber paneling:  a bounty of peepholes for hidden eyes.  Clarke thought she heard the rustling of large animals in hiding, the occasional quiet murmur of muffled voices, but she and Lubin seemed to be the only ones here on the floor beneath.
Sudden motion to the left.  A great fountain had once decorated the center of this place; these days its broad soapstone basin, spread out in the perpetual shadow of the squat, seemed to serve primarily as a community dumpster.  Pieces of a woman were detaching themselves from that backdrop.  The illusion was far from perfect, now that Clarke focused on it.  The chromatophores on the woman's unitard mimicked her background in broad strokes at best, producing more of a blurry translucence than outright invisibility.  Not that this particular K seemed to care about camouflage; the ambulatory hair wasn't exactly designed to blend with the background.
She approached them like a fuzzy cloud with body parts attached.  "You must be Kenny," she said to Lubin.  "I'm Laurel.  Yuri said you had skin problems."  She gave Clarke an appraising glance, blinking over pupils slit subtly vertical..  "Like the eyes.  Takes balls to go for rifter chic in these parts."  
Clarke looked back expressionlessly.  After a moment, Laurel turned back to Lubin.  "Yuri's wait—"
Lubin snapped her neck   Laurel sagged bonelessly into his arms, her head lolling.
"Fuck, Ken!"  Clarke staggered back as if she'd been kicked in the stomach.  "What are you..."
From the rustling cliff dwellings above them, sudden silence.
Lubin had Laurel laid out on her back, his pack at her side.  Her cat eyes stared up at the belly of the squat, wide and astonished.
"Ken!"
"I told you in-kind services might be necessary."  He fished a handgrip of some kind from his pack, pressed a stud on its hilt. A thin blade snicked into view.  It hummed.  One stroke and Laurel's unitard was split from crotch to throat.  The elastic fabric pulled apart like slashed mesentery.
Chat.  Snap.  Sag.  Just like that. It was impossible to banish the image.  
Deep abdominal cut, right side.  No blood.  A wisp of blue smoke curled up from the incision.  It carried the scent of cauterizing flesh.
Clarke looked around frantically.  There was still no one else in sight, but it felt as though a thousand eyes were on them.  It felt as though the whole teetering structure over their heads was holding its breath, as though it might collapse on them at any second.
Lubin plunged his hand into Laurel's side.   There was no hesitation, no exploratory poke-and-prod.  He knew exactly where he was going.  Whatever he was after must be showing up on his inlays.
Laurel's eyes turned in her head.  They stared at Lenie Clarke.
"Oh God, she's alive..."
"She can't feel it," Lubin said.
How could he do this? Clarke wondered, and an instant later:  After all these years, how could I still be surprised?
Lubin's blood-soaked hand came back into sight.  Something pea-sized glistened like a pearl in the clotting gore between thumb and forefinger.  A child began crying somewhere in the warren overhead.  Lubin lifted his face to the sound.
"Witnesses, Ken..."
He stood.  Laurel lay bleeding out at his feet, her eyes still fixed on Lenie Clarke.
"They're used to it."  He started walking.  "Come on."
She backed away a few steps.  Laurel stared steadily at the place where Lenie Clarke had been.
"No time," Lubin called over his shoulder.
Clarke turned and fled after him.

#

Island Airport pushed up against the southern reaches of the static dome.  There was no island that Clarke could see, only a low broad building with helicopters and ultralights scattered across its roof.  Either there was no security or Lubin's negotiations had seduced it; they walked unaccosted to a four-seater Sikorsky-Bell outfitted with passive cloaking.  The pearl shucked from Laurel's guts proved to be the keys to its heart.
Toromilton dimmed in the distance behind them.  They flew north beneath the sight of some hypothetical radar, threading between silver-gray treetops.  Darkness and photocollagen hid a multitude of sins; for all Clarke knew every plant, every rock, every square meter of the landscape below was coated in ?ehemoth.  You couldn't tell through the photoamps, though.  The terrain scrolling past was frosted and beautiful.  Occasional lakes slid beneath them like great puddles of mercury, dimly radiant.
She didn't mention the view to Lubin.  She didn't know if his prosthetic eyes came equipped with night vision, but he'd switched them off anyway—at least, the little green LED was dark.  Nav must be talking directly to his inlays.
"She didn't know she was carrying it," Clarke said.  They were the first words she'd spoken since Laurel's eyes had fixed and dilated.
"No.  Yuri made her a home-cooked meal."
"He wanted her dead."
"Evidently."
Clarke shook her head.  Laurel's eyes wouldn't leave her alone.  "But why that way?  Why put it inside her?"
"I suspect he didn't trust me to keep up my end of the deal."  The corner of Lubin's mouth twitched slightly.  "Rather elegant solution, actually."
So someone thought that Ken Lubin might be reluctant to commit murder.  It should have been cause for hope.
"For the keys to a helicopter," Clarke said.  "I mean, couldn't we just—"
"Just what, Lenie?" he snapped.  "Fall back on all those high-level contacts that I used to have?  Call the rental agency?  Has it still not dawned on you that a continental hot zone and five years of martial law might have had some impact on intercity travel?"  Lubin shook his head  "Or perhaps you don't think we're giving Desjardins enough time to set up his defenses.  Perhaps we should just walk the distance to give him a sporting chance."
She'd never heard him talk like this before.  It was as if some chess grand-master, renowned for icy calm, had suddenly cursed and kicked over the board in the middle of a game.
They flew in silence for a while.
"I can't believe it's really him," she said at last.
"I don't see why not."  Lubin was back in battle-computer mode.  "We know he lied about Seppuku."
"Maybe he made an honest mistake.  Taka's an actual MD and she even—"
"It's him," Lubin said.
She didn't push it.
"Where are we going?" she asked. 
"Sudbury.  Evidently he didn't want to give up home-field advantage."
"It wasn't destroyed during Rio?"
"Desjardins caused Rio."
"What? Who told you that?"
"I know the man.  It makes sense."
"Not to me."
"Desjardins was the first to slip the leash.  He had a brief window in which he was the only man on the planet with all the power of a 'lawbreaker and none of the constraints.  He used it to eliminate the competition before Spartacus freed them."
"But it wasn't just Sudbury.  Rio took out cities all over."  She remembered words and images streaming across the Atlantic.  An industrial lifter inexplicably crashing into the CSIRA tower in Salt Lake.  A fast-neutron bomb in the unlikely hands of the Daughters of Lenie.  Quantum shriekers falling from orbit onto Sacramento and Boise.
"Sudbury wouldn't have been the only franchise seeded," Lubin pointed out.  "Desjardins must have obtained the list and gone to town."
"And blamed it on Rio," Clarke murmured.
"All the post-hoc evidence pointed there.  Of course, the city was vaporized before anyone had a chance to ask questions.  Very little forensic evidence survives ground zero."  Lubin tapped a control icon.  "As far as anyone knew at the time, Desjardins saved the day.  He was the toast of the town.  At least he was the toast of anyone with enough clearance to know who he was."
There was a subtext to the aridity in Lubin's voice.  His clearance had been revoked by then.
"But he couldn't have got everyone," Clarke said.
"He didn't have to.  Only those infected with Spartacus.  That would have been a minority even in seeded franchises, assuming he hit them early enough."
"There'd still be people off shift, people off sick—"
"Wipe out half a city, you get them too."
"Still—"
"You're right, to a point," Lubin allowed.  "It's likely some escaped.  But even that worked in Desjardins's favor.  He can't very well blame Rio for his actions now.  He can't blame everything on Madonnas, but as long as convenient scapegoats from Rio or Topeka are at large, nobody's likely to suspect him when some piece of high-level sabotage comes to light.  He saved the world, after all."
She sighed.  "So what now?"
"We go get him."
"Just like that that, huh?  Blind spy and his rookie sidekick are going to battle their way through sixty-five floors of CSIRA security?"
"Assuming we can get there.  He's likely to have all approaches under continuous satellite surveillance.  He must have planned for the word getting out eventually, which means he'll be equipped to handle large-scale retaliation up to and including missile attacks from overseas.  Far more than we can muster."
"He thinks he can take on the rest of the world?"
"More likely he only expects to see the rest of the world coming in time to get away."
"So is that your plan?  He's expecting an all-out assault so he won't notice one measly helicopter?"
"That would be nice," Lubin admitted with a grim smile.  "I'm not counting on it.  And even if he doesn't notice us on approach, he's had nearly four years to fill the building itself up with countermeasures.  It would probably be impossible for us to guard against them all even if I knew what they all were."
"So what do we do?"
"I'm still working on the details.  I expect we'll end up walking through the front door."
Clarke looked at his fingernails.  The dried blood beneath turned their edges brown.
"You've put all these pieces together," she said.  "They make him a monster."
"Aren't we all." 
"He wasn't.  Do you even remember?"
Lubin didn't answer.
"You were going to kill me, remember?  And I'd just killed everyone else.  We were the monsters, Ken, and you remember what he did?"
"Yes."
"He tried to save me.  From you.  He'd never even met me face to face, and he knew exactly who I was and what I'd done, and he knew first-hand what you were capable of.  And it didn't matter.  He risked his life to save mine."
"I remember." Lubin tweaked controls.  "You broke his nose." 
"That's not the point."
"That person doesn't exist any more," he said.  "Spartacus turned him into something else."
"Yeah?  And what did it do to you, Ken?"
His blind, pitted face turned. 
"I know one thing it didn't do," she went on.  "It didn't give you your murder habit.  You had that all along, didn't you?"
The pince-nez stared back at her like mantis eyes.  A green LED ignited on its left lens.
"What's it like, Ken?  Is it cathartic?  Is it sexual?  Does it get you off?"  A part of her looked on, alarmed.  The rest couldn't stop goading him.  "Do you have to be right there, watching us die, or is it enough to just plant the bomb and know we'll be dropping like flies offstage?"
"Lenie."  His voice was very calm.  "What exactly are you trying to accomplish?"
"I just want to know what you're after, that's all.  I don't see anyone waving pitchforks and torches at you just because Spartacus rewired your brain.  If you're sure about this, if he really did all these things and he's really some kind of monster, then fine.  But if this is just some fucked-up excuse for you to indulge your perverse little fetish, then..."
She shook her head in disgust and glared into the darkness.
"You'd like his perversions somewhat less than mine," Lubin said quietly.
"Right," she snorted.  "Thanks for the input."
"Lenie..."
"What?"
"I'm never gratuitous," he told her.
"Really?"  She looked a challenge at him.  "Never?"
He looked back.  "Well.  Hardly ever."
EXPIRATION DATE
Equal parts dead and alive— and hardly caring which way the balance went—Taka Ouellette had figured it out.
She'd never done well under pressure.  That had always been her problem.  And Achilles the monster hadn't understood that.  Or maybe he'd understood it too well.  Whatever.  He had put her under the mother of all high-pressure scenarios, and of course she'd fallen apart.  She'd proven once again to be the eternal fuck-up.  And it was so unfair, because she knew she had a good head on her shoulders, she knew she could figure things out if only people would stop leaning on her.  If only Ken hadn't been there with his biowar canister, expecting answers right now.  If only Achilles hadn't come within a hair of incinerating her alive, and then rushing her through Seppuku's gene sequence without so much as letting her catch her breath.
If only Dave hadn't been so impatient.  If only she hadn't hurried on that last crucial diagnostic...
She was a smart lady.  She knew it.  But she was terrible under pressure.  Bad, bad Alice, she chided herself.
But now that the pressure was off, see how well she put everything together?
It had only taken two things to get her over the hump.  Achilles had to leave her alone for a bit, give her a chance to think.  And she had to die.  Well, start dying anyway.  Once she knew she was dead, once she felt it in her bones, no reprieves, no last-minute rescue—all the pressure disappeared.  For the first time in her life, it seemed, she could think clearly.
She didn't know how long it had been since Achilles had been by to torture her.  She figured at least a day or two.  Maybe a week—but no, surely she'd be dead already if he'd left her here for a whole week?  Her joints had frozen up in the meantime.  Even if she were to be released from the exoskeleton, her body was as rigid as rigor...  
Maybe it was rigor.  Maybe she'd already finished dying and hadn't noticed.  Certainly things didn't seem to hurt as much as they had—although maybe she just didn't notice the pain so much now, on account of the raging thirst.   One thing you could say about Achilles, he'd always kept her fed and watered.  Didn't want her too weak to perform, he'd said.
But it had been so very long since he'd come by.  Taka would have killed for a glass of water, if she hadn't already have died for want of one.
But wasn't it nice that nothing mattered any more?  And wasn't it nice that she'd actually figured it out?
She wished that Achilles would come back.  Not just for the water, although that would be nice.  She wanted to show him.  She wanted to prove he was wrong.  She wanted him to be proud of her.
It all had to do with that silly little song about the fleas.  He must have known that, that's why he'd serenaded her in the first place.  Has smaller fleas that on him prey, and these have smaller still to bite 'em...
Life within life.  She could see it now.  She was amazed that she'd never seen it before.  It wasn't even a new concept.  It was downright old.  Mitochondria were littler fleas that lived in every eukaryotic cell.  Today they were vital organelles, the biochemical batteries of life itself—but a billion years ago they'd been independent organisms in their own right, little free-living bacteria.   A larger cell had engulfed them, had forgotten to chew before it swallowed—and so they'd struck up a deal, the big cell and the little one.  The big cell would provide a safe, stable environment; the little one, in turn, would pump out energy for its host.  That ancient act of failed predation had turned into the primordial symbiosis...and even today, mitochondria kept their own genes, reproduced on their own schedule, within the flesh of the host.
It was still going on.  ?ehemoth itself had stuck up a similar relationship within the cells of some of the creatures that shared its deep-sea environment, providing an energy surplus which the host fish used to grow faster.  It grew within the cells of things here on land, too—with somewhat less beneficial consequences, true, but then virulence is always high when two radically disparate organisms encounter each other for the first time...
Achilles hadn't been singing about fleas at all.  He'd been singing about endosymbiosis.
Seppuku must carry its own little fleas.  There was more than enough room—all those redundant genes could code for any number of viral organisms, as well as merely masking the suicidal recessives.  Seppuku not only killed itself off when its job is done—it gave birth to a new symbiont, a viral one probably, that would take up residence inside the host cell.  It would fill the niche so effectively that ?ehemoth would find nothing but no-vacancy signs if it came sniffing around afterwards, looking to move back in. 
There were even precedents, of a sort.  Taka remembered some of them from med school.    Malaria had been beaten when baseline mosquitoes lost out to a faster-breeding variant that didn't transmit Plasmodium.  AIDS stopped being a threat when benign strains outnumbered lethal ones.  Those were nothing, though, diseases that attacked a handful of species at most.  ?ehemoth threatened everything with a nucleus; you'd never beat the witch by infecting the Human race, or replacing one species of insect with another.  The only way to win against ?ehemoth would be to counterinfect everything.
Seppuku would have to redesign life itself, from the inside out.  And it could do it, too:  it had an edge that poor old ?ehemoth had never even dreamed of.  Achilles had forced her to remember that too, half an eternity ago:  TNA could duplex with modern nucleic acids.  It could talk to the genes of its host cell, it could join the genes of its host cell.  It could change anything and everything.
If she was right—and hovering at the edge of her life, she'd never been more certain of anything—Seppuku was more than a cure for ?ehemoth.  It was the most profound evolutionary leap since the rise of the eukaryotic cell.  It was a solution far too radical for the fiddlers and  tweakers who hadn't been able to see beyond the old paradigm of Life As We Know It.   The deep-sea enzymes, the arduous painstaking retrofits that had allowed Taka and others like her to claim immunity—improvised scaffolding, no more.   Struts and crutches to keep some teetering body plan alive long after its expiration date.  People had grown too attached to the chemical tinkertoys that had defined them for three billion years.  The most nostalgia could ever do was postpone the inevitable.
Seppuku's architects were more radical.  They'd thrown away the old cellular specs entirely and started from scratch, they were rewriting the very chemistry of life.   Every eukaryotic species would be changed at the molecular scale.  No wonder Seppuku's creators had kept it under wraps; you didn't have to be an M&M to be terrified by such an extreme solution.  People always chose the devils they knew, even if that devil was ?ehemoth.  People just wouldn't accept that success couldn't be achieved through just a little more tinkering...
Taka could barely imagine the shape of the success that was unfolding now.  Perhaps the strange new insects she'd been seeing were the start of it, fast short lives that evolved through dozens of generations in a season.  Achilles hadn't been able to keep it out after all:  those joyful, monstrous bugs proved it.  He had only been able to keep it from infecting Humanity.
And even there, he was doomed to fail.  Salvation would take root in everything eventually, as it had taken root in the arthropods.  It would just take more time for creatures who lived at a slower pace.  Our turn will come, Taka thought.
How would it work? she wondered.  How to outcompete the hypercompetitor?  Brute force, perhaps?  Sheer cellular voracity, the same scramble-competition strategy that ?ehemoth had used to beat Life 1.0, turned back upon itself?  Would life burn twice as bright and half as long, would the whole biosphere move faster, think faster, live furiously and briefly as mayflies?
But that was the old paradigm, to transform yourself into your enemy and then claim victory.  There were other options, once you gave up on reinforcing and turned to redesign instead.   Taka Ouellette, mediocre progeny of the Old Guard,  couldn't begin to guess at what they were.   She doubted anyone could.  What simulation could predict the behavior of a multimillion-species system when every living variable was perturbed at once?  How many carefully-selected experimental treatments would it take to model a billion simultaneous mutations?  Seppuku—whatever Seppuku was poised to become—threw the very concept of a controlled experiment out the window.
North America was the experiment—unannounced, uncontrolled, an inconceivably tangled matrix of multiway ANOVAs and Hyperniche tables.  Even if it failed, the world would hardly be worse off.   ?ehemoth would have suffered a major setback, Seppuku would have fallen on its sword, and whatever came after would at least—unlike ?ehemoth— be limited to the inside of a host cell. 
And maybe it wouldn't fail.  Maybe everything would change for the better.  There would be monsters, some hopeful.  Mitochondria themselves might finally be driven to extinction, their ancient lease expired at last.  Maybe people would change from the inside out, the old breed gone, replaced by something that looked the same but acted better.
Maybe it was about fucking time.
A little man nattered at her from a great distance.   He stood in front of her, an irritating homunculus in ultrasharp focus, as if seen through the wrong end of a telescope.  He paced back and forth, gesticulating madly.   Taka gathered that he was afraid of something, or someone.  Yes, that was it:  someone was coming for him.   He spoke as if his head was full of voices, as if he had lost control of a great many things at once.  He threatened her—she thought he was threatening her, although his efforts seemed almost comical.  He sounded like a lost little boy trying to act brave while looking for a place to hide.
"I figured it out," Taka told him.  Her voice cracked like cheap brittle plastic.  She wondered why that was.  "It wasn't so hard."
But he was too caught up in his own little world.  It didn't matter.  He didn't seem like the kind of person who'd really appreciate the dawn of a new age anyway.
So many things were about to happen.   The end of Life As We Knew It. The beginning of Life As We Don't.  It had already started.  Her biggest regret was that she wouldn't be around to see how it all turned out.
Dave, honey, she thought.  I did it.  I got it right at last.
You'd be proud of me.
BASTILLE
Sudbury rose in the night like a luminous tumor.
Its core glowed from within, faintly by dryback standards but brighter than day to Lenie Clarke:  a walled, claustrophobic cluster of refitted skyscrapers in an abandoned wasteland of suburbs and commercial zones.  The static field was obvious by inference.  All the recent construction, the new buildings and the grafted retrofits, the galls of living space wedged into the gaps between buildings—all extended to the inner edge of the field and no further.  Like metastasis constrained under glass, Sudbury had grown into a hemisphere.
They cut through from the east.  Clarke's diveskin squirmed in the field like a slug in a flame.  Charged air transformed the rotors into whirling vortices of brilliant blue sparks.  She found the effect oddly nostalgic; it seemed almost bioluminescent, like microbes fluorescing in the heat of a deep-sea vent.  For a moment she could pretend that it was some airborne variant of Saint Elmo's Fire that trailed from those spinning blades.  
But only for a moment.  There was only one microorganism up here worth mentioning, and it was anything but luminous.
And then they were through, sniffing westward through the upper reaches of the Sudbury core.  The walls of city canyons loomed close on either side; Clarke swore they would graze the rotor at any moment.  Sheet lightning sparked and flickered along the strip of sky overhead.  Far below, intermittently visible beneath the new construction, some vestigial rapitrans line ran along the canyon floor like a taut copper thread.
She resumed loading acrylic clips from the open backpack at her feet.  Lubin had toured her through the procedure somewhere over Georgian Bay.  Each clip contained a dozen slug grenades, color-coded by function:  flash, gas, shipworm, clusterfuck.  They went into a belt-and-holster arrangement draped over her thigh.
Lubin spared a prosthetic glance across the cockpit.  "Don't forget to seal that pack when you're done.  How's your tape?"
She unzipped her top and checked the diveskin beneath.  A broad X of semipermeable tape blocked off the electrolysis intake.  "Still sticking." She zipped her dryback disguise back into place.  "Won't this attract attention from the local authorities?  Buzzing the rooftops like this?"
"Not those authorities."  Lubin's tone evoked blind eyes, turning.  Evidently derms and antidotes and gutted bodies bought more than transportation.  Clarke didn't push the issue; she slid one last cartridge home and turned her attention forward.
A couple of blocks ahead, the canyon ended.
"So that's where he is," she murmured.
"That's where he is."  Lubin throttled back so that they were barely drifting forward.  
It spread out before their approach like a great dark coliseum, a clear zone carved from the claustrophobic architecture.  Lubin brought the Sikorsky-Bell to a dead stop three hundred meters up, just short of that perimeter.
It was a walled moat, two blocks on a side.  A lone skyscraper rose from its center, a ghostly crown of blue lights glowing dimly from its roof; everything else was dead and dark, sixty-five floors with not so much as a pane alight.  Patchwork foundations scarred the empty ground beneath, the footprints of demolished buildings that had crowded the neighborhood back in happier times.  Now there were only straight lines and right-angles in the dirt.
She wondered what normal eyes would see now, if normal eyes ever ventured here after dark.   Maybe, when Sudbury's citizens looked to the west, they didn't see the Entropy Patrol at all.  Maybe they saw a haunted tower, dark and ominous, full of skeletons and sick crawling things.  Buried in the guts of the twenty-first century, besieged by alien microbes and ghosts in the machinery, could people be blamed for rediscovering a belief in evil spirits?
Perhaps they weren't even entirely wrong.
Lubin pointed to the spectral lights flickering on the parapet.  A landing pad rose from that nimbus, a dozen smaller structures holding court around it—freight elevators, ventilation shacks, the housings of retracted lifter umbilicals.
Clarke looked skeptically across the cockpit.  "No."  Surely they couldn't just land there.  Surely there'd be defenses.
Lubin was almost grinning.  "Let's find out."
"I'm not so sure that's—"
He hit the throttle.  They leapt into empty, unprotected space.
They banked right almost as soon as they left the canyons.  Clarke reflexively braced her hands against the dash.  Earth and sky rotated around them; suddenly the ground was a hundred meters off her right shoulder, an archeological ruin of rectangular foundations—and two black circles, meters across, staring up at her like the eye sockets of some giant cartoon skull.  Not empty, though.  Not even flat:  they bulged subtly from the ground, like the polar regions of great buried spheres.
"What're those?" she asked.
No answer.  Clarke looked across at Lubin.  He was holding his binoculars one-handed between his knees, holding his pince-nez against their eyepieces.  The apparatus stared down through the ventral canopy.   She tried to imagine the subjective experience:  how to deal with the sense of one's eyes floating half a meter outside the skull?
"I said—"
"Superheating artefact.  Soil grains explode like popcorn."
"What would do that?  Land mine?"
He shook his head absently, his attention caught by something near the base of the building.  "Particle beam.  Orbital cannon."
Her gut clenched.  "If he's got—Ken, what if he sees—"
Something flashed, sodium-bright, through the back of her skull.  Clockwork stuttered briefly in her chest.  The Sikorsky-Bell's controls hiccoughed once, in impossible unison, and went dark.
"I think he has," Lubin remarked as the engine died.

#

Wind whistled faintly through the fuselage.  The rotor continued to whup-whup-whup overhead, its blades slapping the air through sheer unpowered inertia.  There was no other sound but Lubin, cursing under his breath as they hung between earth and sky.  
But only for an instant.  In the next they were falling.  
Her stomach lurched into her throat.  Lubin's feet slammed pedals.  "Tell me when we pass sixty meters."
She stared, paralyzed.  "Wha—"
"I'm blind."  His teeth were bared in some twisted hybrid of fear and exultation; his hands gripped the joystick with relentless futility.  "Tell me when—the tenth floor!  Tell me when we pass the tenth floor!"
She struggled to obey, tried desperately to count the floors as they plunged, playing chicken Planet Earth.  They fell past the building's edge at forty-five degrees; the north face coasted into view and a mouth gaped in its side, black and toothless, wide enough to swallow legions.  Part of Lenie Clarke quailed and gibbered and knew it had seconds to live.  The rest of her ignored the distraction and focused on the floors beneath, tried to count from the ground up.  They were diving straight past that impossible maw—they were diving straight into it—
"Le—"
"Now!" she yelled.
For a second that went on forever, Lubin did nothing at all.  
The strangest sensations, in that elastic moment.  The sound of the rotor, still impossibly awhirl through luck or magic or sheer bloody-minded denial, its machine-gun rhythm dopplered down like the slow, distant heartbeat of a receding astronaut.  The sight of the ground racing up to spike them into oblivion.  Sudden calm resignation, a recognition of the inevitable:  we're going to die.  And a nod, sadly amused, to the irony that the mighty Ken Lubin, who always thought ten steps ahead, could have made such a stupid fucking mistake.
But then he yanked on the stick and the chopper reared back, losing its nerve at the last moment.  Suddenly she weighed a hundred tonnes.  They faced the sky; the world skidded around them, earth and glass and far-off cloud rolling past the windshield in a blurry jumble.  For one astonishing moment they hovered.  Then something kicked them from behind:  from behind, the sound of cracking polymers and tearing metal.  They lurched sideways and that magical rotor slashed the ground and stopped dead at last.  Lenie Clarke stared up at the ravenous face of a great dark monolith leaning crazily against the night sky, descending along with the darkness to devour her.

#

"Lenie."
She opened her eyes.  The mouth still yawned overhead.  Only it wasn't a mouth, she could tell as her eyes focused.  Just a great charred hole, partway up the north façade, stretching across ten gutted floors or more.  
Rio, she realized.  They never repaired the damage.  
The roof of the building was clearly visible, straight ahead through the forward windshield.  The lights up there had gone out.  The whole building seemed to lean to the left; the chopper's nose was twisted up at a thirty-degree angle, like some mechanical mole breaching from the earth and torqued on its axis.  
The tail boom must have either crumpled at their backs or snapped off entirely.
"Lenie."
There was pain in her chest and arms.  There was something wrong with the sky.  It was—that was it, it was dark.  They were in a clave, where static-field generators hummed endless electricity into the air.  Sudbury's sky should have been flickering.  Before they'd fallen, it had been.
"Lenie!"  Lubin's hand was on her shoulder.
"Was that a pulse?" she said.
"Are you injured?"
She focused, and located the source of the pain:  Lubin's backpack, hard and lumpy, clutched tightly as life itself against her chest.  It must have risen from the floor during the dive, she must have grabbed it in midair.  She remembered none of it.  The slit along its top puckered like a mouth in her embrace, affording glimpses of the stuff inside—an angular jumble of tools and ordnance pressing painfully into her flesh.
She willed her grip to relax.  The pain subsided.  
"Len—"
"I think I'm okay."  She turned her head; more pain shot from her neck through the back of her skull.  "Maybe some whiplash.  I've had worse.   Are you—"
He looked blindly back at her through sandblasted eyes.
"Your pince-nez," she remembered.  An image from the fall came to her, unregistered until now:  Lubin's prosthetic sailing gracefully towards the back of the cabin.  "The pulse must've—"
"I packed another pair," he said.  "The knapsack's shielded."
Its open mouth grinned at her, zipper-toothed.  Realization crashed over her in a sickening wave.  "Oh, fuck, Ken, I—I forgot to zip it up.  Shit, I'm—"
He waved away her apology.  "You're my eyes, then.  Can you—"
Maybe he heard her sudden intake of breathe.  Maybe he felt her tense in her seat.
"What?" he asked.
"Something moving."
The chopper was stargazing:  she had to look down to see forward.  The CSIRA tower rose from the ground a good eighty meters past the ventral bubble.  Dark apparitions raced into view around its edge, leaning hard into the turn and bearing straight for the chopper.  There were a dozen of them, two dozen, more—low against the ground, necks stretched forward, heads strangely misshapen.
Boosted light stripped nothing from these creatures.  They were utterly black.
"What?" Lubin repeated, more urgently. 
"Dogs, I think."  They did not bark or growl.  They made no sound at all.  She could see teeth now, little flecks of gray flickering in and out of view in time to the snapping of silent jaws.  She could see the reflected glint of sparse light in small black eyes.  Their heads were massive, great wedges of muscle and bone.
They might have been dogs once, she supposed.
"Are we breached?  Can they get inside?"
Sawtooth serrations, embedded in jaws like leghold traps— 
"Lenie!  Are we breached?"
She twisted in her seat.  Pain splintered down her spine like cracking ice.  She gasped, fought it down.  "No.  The rear bulkhead's crumpled to shit, but nothing's open." 
Lubin nodded.  "How many dogs?"
"Twenty.  Thirty.  At least.  Oh Jesus, Ken, they're right outside..."  They were huge.  They didn't waste energy on brute animal rage, didn't throw themselves slavering against the hull to get at the soft meat inside.  They circled like silent sharks.  
Clarke fought rising panic.  "We're surrounded.  The moment we open the door—"
"I have no intention of opening the door," he told her.
Smartest decision you've made yet, she didn't say—
—and remembered twin mounds of carbonized earth.
"Oh shit.  We're dead."
Lubin shook his head.  "They're out there.  We're in here."
"Who cares?"  She felt a giddy, hysterical laugh at the back of her throat.  "He's got an orbital cannon!  Any second now he'll just...oh fuck Ken, we're dead—"
"Snap out of it," Lubin barked.  Suddenly he was leaning close enough to kiss; corroded lips pulled back in a skeletal grimace.  "If he was trying to kill us we'd be dead already, do you understand?  And he'd be foolish to risk a cannon even if he wanted to; if he brings his satellites online he risks losing them to the shredders."
"But he already—the pulse—"
"Didn't come from orbit.  He must have packed half the floors in his building with capacitors.  He's only trying to soften us up."  He thrust out his hand.  "Now give me my pack."
She obeyed, numbly.  He's not trying to kill us.  It was Lubin's working hypothesis; he'd spelled it out on the way from Toromilton.  Clarke wasn't entirely sure that recent events bore him out.
Lubin set the pack on his lap and pulled out the Heckler & Koch and its affiliated ammo belt.  "Take this.  Put it on."
She did.  Lubin withdrew another belt.  "We've got to get inside."
"How? You're blind, and I—I might as well be."  
He ran his hands across his grenade pistol.  The weapon came with three cartridge slots and a little thumbwheel to choose between them.  He felt out flash, shipworm, and clusterfuck from the belt and slotted them in.  
The silent pack seethed on all sides.  Clarke watched them, her mouth utterly dry.  "What if they're armored?  What if they're wired?"
"They'll be pulse-proof.  No hard circuitry.  The usual tweaks, nothing more."  He zipped up the pack and slung it across his back, tightening the straps around shoulders and waist.  "What's yours set for?"
She checked.  "Conotoxins.  Ken, what if—are the guns even pulse-proof?  No electronics or—"
A sudden, frightening memory added to her problems:  machinery in her chest, hiccoughing.  "Our implants—"
"Myoelectric.  EMP doesn't bother them.  Much."  He tightened his ammo belt around his waist.  "Can you see the main entrance?"
A bank of glass doors, set into a broad indentation in the building's ground-level façade.  "Yes."
"Gloves."  He was already sealing his own to the gauntlets beneath his clothing.  "Describe the route."
"We—we crashed on the edge of the main drag."  Clarke pulled her gloves over shaking hands.  "It leads up to the entrance, that's eighty meters to your, about eleven o'clock.  Old foundations on either side, pretty much razed and filled.  No real cover."
"Obstructions?"
"A pack of rabid monster dogs waiting to tear us apart."
"Apart from that."  Lubin clambered back down into the tilted cabin behind their seats.
"Nothing obvious."   She stared at his corroded eyes, the oozing flesh of his face.  "Ken, this is crazy.  How you gonna aim?"   
"The same way we landed.  You'll give me bearings."  He sat back on the floor, his back braced against the fuselage just behind Clarke's seat.  "Nose plugs."
They'd improvised them en route, little wads of the same semipermeable tape that blocked her intake.  Clarke stuffed one up each nostril.
"When we get out there," Lubin told her, breathing through his mouth, "point me at the entrance.  That's twelve o'clock.  All target bearings relative to that,  not to where I happen to be facing at any given time.  Do you understand?"
She nodded, forgetting for an instant, then:  "Yes."
"And lose the gloves as soon as we're free of the fire.  If he knows we've got diveskins under our clothes he could figure it out."
"He's a certified genius, Ken.  He could figure it out anyway."
"We do what we can."
Patient, bloodthirsty killers paced just past the canopy.  They seemed to look her in the eye.  They smiled, showing teeth the size of thumbs.  
Just the usual tweaks, she thought, giddy and terrified.
"We can do this, Lenie," Lubin said softly.  "Just remember what I told you."
He'd told her to be his eyes.  He'd told her to give him bearings.  He'd made her his bodyguard.
It was a hell of a time to find out that Lubin's death fetish extended to suicide.
He's not trying to kill us, she reminded herself, and wondered who exactly that applied to.    
"Ready?" Lubin asked.  
She braced back against the canopy, raising her gloved hands to protect her face.  "You're sure he expects us to survive?"
"Fairly."
"But does he know you're blind?"
Lubin pointed his gun across the cabin.  The thumbwheel locked onto clusterfuck.
"I doubt it," he said, and fired.

#

She held her breath against the heat.  She shut her eyes against the flash.
Her lids glowed sudden, bloody orange.  Someone had thrust her head into a kiln.  She swore she could feel the heat blasting skin from her unprotected face.  She clenched her teeth and fought the urge to suck in breath.  The air roared with expanding gases, crackled with flame, sizzled with spatterings of liquid metal.  She could hear the crack of Lubin's pistol firing again at her side.  
Suddenly the pain was gone:  fear and adrenaline had swept it away in an instant.
The world dimmed beyond her eyelids.  She opened them.  A hole gaped in the side of the chopper.  Soft alloy glowed around its edges.  Acrylic peeled and blackened.  Chunks of shredded canopy guttered on the floor; one had missed her left foot by two centimeters.
Lubin fired a third time.  A spread of incendiary needles shot through the breach and into the darkness beyond, a tiny, devastating meteor shower.  Clusterfucks were built to burn a thousand tiny holes across a wide area, but you don't get much dispersal at point-blank range.  Concentrated in a circle less than two meters across, those thousand bomblets had done a fair impersonation of an RPG.
"Diameter!" he shouted over the ambience.  "Details!"
She eyed the hole.  The edges glowed dim, sullen red in places; twisted chunks of torn fuselage lay across the lower lip, spilling a half-meter into the cabin and perhaps twice that onto the ground outside.  A spray of fuselage fragments burned or congealed on the ground further out.
"Meter and a half!  Don't touch the edges!"  She sucked burning plastic, choked and coughed.  "Big fallen chunks a meter past the breach!  Smaller bits further out!"
Lubin launched himself through the ring of fire, passed over the at its threshold.  He hit the ground shoulder-first, rolling, regained his feet in an instant.  A lozenge of hot metal smoldered like a branding iron against his left shoulder blade.  Lubin writhed, reached around and pushed it loose with the muzzle of his gun.  It dropped to the ground, smoldering, tarry with half-melted copolymer.  A ragged hole smoked in the shirt on Lubin's back; the injured diveskin beneath squirmed as if alive. 
Once more into the breach.  Clarke gritted her teeth and dove after him.
A pulse of heat, almost comfortable, caressed her unprotected face as the torn fuselage sailed past around her.   A bright spark of pain, needle-sharp and needle-fine, ignited briefly on her forearm and faded.  Blessed cool air washed over her and she was on the ground, skidding.
Two great charring carcasses twitched and burned in front of her, grinning behind charred lips.
She scrambled to her feet, peeling off her gloves.   Lubin's clusterfucks had driven the other dogs back for the moment; they held the perimeter at a more discrete distance.  Lubin swept his weapon back and forth across the nightscape, pure threat display.  Holding his fire.  
"Lenie!"
"Two down!"   She reached his side, pointing her H&K at the circling horde.  "The others have backed off."  She turned him clockwise.  "Entrance that way.  Twelve o'clock."  Remember, she told herself.  Bearings from the entrance, bearings from the—
He nodded.  "Range?"
"Eighty me—"
"No, the dogs!"  He held his pistol two-handed, arms extended, elbows slightly bent.  He looked almost relaxed.
"Uh—twenty-five meters, maybe."  Bearings from—
"Smart.  Just past effective range."
"Your range is twenty-five lousy meters?"
"Wide spread."  It made sense, of course—a useful cheat for a poor marksman, and blind was as poor as it got.  The catch was a needle-cloud so widely dispersed that distant targets passed through it untouched.  "Try yours."
Clarke aimed.  Her hands wouldn't stop shaking.  She fired once, twice.  The H&K bucked in her grip.  Its bark was surprisingly soft.
The dogs stared back, undiminished.  
"Missed.  Unless they're immune, Ken, you said they were tweaked—"
Sudden motion to the right, a rush along the flank.  "Two o'clock,"  Clarke hissed.  Lubin turned and shot a firestorm of needles.  "Eight!"  He swung and fired again, barely missing Clarke as she ducked beneath his outstretched arms.
Splinters of fire laced the ground to both sides.  Three more dogs were down, lacerated by flaming shrapnel.  Two more, fitfully ignited, fled back out of range.  Still the pack was mute.  The only sound was the soft crackling of flame behind them.  The perimeter boiled with black, silent anger.
She kept her own weapon up, for all the good it would do.  "Three down, two injured.   The rest of them are holding back."   
"How close did they get?"
"Ten meters.  Seemed more like a feint than an all-out attack."  
"Not good," Lubin said.
No fucking shit, Ken.  The crashed Sikorsky-Bell blocked any approach from behind, but the moment they started forward they'd be vulnerable from the full three-sixty.  And the enemy wasn't taking any stupid chances either, wasn't giving in to any brute animalistic killer instinct.  They knew all about biding their time.  They knew about diversionary tactics too, from the look of it.  Exploratory incursions.  Hell, they probably knew the technical specs on Lubin's pistol.
Smart, smart doggies, she thought.  They didn't just tweak those big ugly heads for bone and muscle, no sirree...
Lubin clicked his thumbwheel.  "Switching to flash," he said.  "In three—"
Two...one...
Clarke squeezed her eyes tight.  Four pops sounded in rapid succession.  A constellation of dim red suns ignited briefly through her eyelids.
"Go!" Lubin barked.
She opened her eyes.  Dogs wheeled on all sides, blinded and confused by the flash grenades.  Briefly blinded; briefly confused.   She had no idea how long it would take for them to recover their bearings.
Her aim was shitty.  She'd never hit them from this range.  She charged. 
Five meters from the nearest beast she started shooting.  She squeezed off five rounds; two hits in the creature's flank.  It snapped and dropped.  Two other dogs stumbled into each other, a mere arm's length away:  one shot each and she was spinning in search of new targets.  Somewhere offside, fire slammed obliquely across the ground.  She ignored it and kept squeezing the trigger.  Something dark and massive hurtled past, bleeding flame.  She nailed it in the flank for good measure.  She shot a leg.  She shot a great heaving ribcage, black and sleek as a diveskin.  She shot a monstrous, silently-snarling face, and realized it had been looking back.
A part of her she hadn't even known was keeping score served up a number:  seven.  That's the number you can take, before they come for you...
She broke and ran.  Lubin was running too, poor blind Lubin, Lubin the human tank.  He'd switched back to clusterfuck and cleared a fiery path down twelve o'clock.  He charged down the driveway—
—I told him no obstructions oh boy will he be pissed if he trips on a sewer grating—
—like a sighted man.  Dogs shook their heads in his wake and wheeled, intent on reacquisition.
They were closing on Clarke, too.  Their paws drummed at her heels like heavy rain on a cloth roof.
She was back on the asphalt, a few meters off Lubin's stern and just to port.  "Seven o'clock!" she cried, diving. 
Incandescent sleet streaked centimeters overhead.  Gravel and coarse pavement flayed the skin of her palms, bruised her arm and shoulder through nested layers of denim and copolymer.  Flesh and fur burst into flame close enough to warm her face.
She twisted onto her back. "Three o'clock!"  Lubin turned and sprayed fire across the bearing.  Three other dogs were closing from Lubin's eleven; still on her back, she held the gun two-handed over her head and took them out with three meters to spare.  She rolled and came to her feet, distantly astonished:  CSIRA's façade loomed barely ten meters away, a row of glassy doors beneath a concrete awning emblazoned with the official logo of the Entropy Patrol.
"Curbside two meters!" she called  "Doors another eight!" 
Lubin nodded:  "Flash on three—"
She got to his side before the countdown ended and ducked, closing her eyes.  Three more pops, three more orange fleshy sunrises.  She opened her eyes.  Lubin was on the edge of CSIRA's sidewalk now, aiming at high noon:  one more clusterfuck and half the doors went down, their panes shattered and melting.  A half-dozen dogs blundered past with stars in their eyes.  Clarke dropped them, backing towards the base of the building, surveying the carnage they'd left in their wake.
Surveying an easy dozen other dogs, coming fast, who did not seem to be blinded at all.
"Fuck." she jumped back, shooting.  "Ken!  Four o'clock, six o—oh, shit, everywhere except—"  where am I?—"eight!"
He spun and laid out more hellfire.  "What's behind me?" he barked..
"Half the doors are out—seven!  Seven!  Four!" She threw herself back under the overhang, firing.  Lubin backed slowly towards her, spitting hot needles against the advance.  Her back slammed the façade, at the edge of the broad indentation that framed the entrance.
She didn't know if she'd hit anything, or if Lubin had.  There seemed to be another smoking carcass on the asphalt; the others had pulled back and were circling again, just outside Lubin's range, looking for an opening.  Clarke pointed her pistol; the dog in her sights veered instantly.
"They know I've got more range than you," she said.  "And I don't know how, but that last flashburst didn't slow them down at all."
Lubin instantly ejected the flash cartridge and jammed another clusterfuck into the slot.  The barrel didn't stop panning for an instant.
"Where are they now?"
"Still circling."  She could have sworn they were watching Lubin's eyes.  If they only knew...
"Reload," he said.  She obeyed instinctively.  She had no idea how much of her clip she'd expended.
"What's behind the doors?"
She spared a glance.  The clusterfuck had only blown the outer doorways; another barrier blocked the way in, a few meters behind. "Heavy slab of some kind, single panel, no obvious latch or keyboard."
"What's between them?"
"Between the doors and the slab?  About three meters.  The slab's where the inner doors would have been.  Six and four!"
Lubin fired across the bottom of the clock.  Two dogs skittered back out of his range.  Not out of Clarke's, though.  One of them fell.
"One more down," Clarke told him.  "The others seem a bit less eager."
"Smart dogs.  Know when to quit." 
Wish we did, she thought fervently.
"The side walls between the inner and outer doors," Lubin snapped.  "Describe them."
"Concrete or biolite or something.  Just walls.  What can I say?"
"Bearings!"
"Uh, for you, ten and two-thirty."
"Cover me."  Lubin switched modes again.  As one, the remaining dogs startled and flinched, turning their heads away.
They heard the thumbwheel click, Clarke realized.  He switched modes before he blinded them the first time, and they remembered the sound and what happened after and they closed their eyes...
But Lubin wasn't using blinders this time.  He wheeled in one smooth motion, fired a shipworm and was back at six o'clock before the enemy could exploit the break.
The worm didn't hit the barrier.  It shot through one of the few outer doors left standing—the panel shattered to glassy dust—and plunged into the two-thirty side wall, spinning fast enough to shatter an event horizon.  It raped its way through that material in a split-second; the wound had just enough time to start glowing before the whole wall erupted like a tabletop Vesuvius.  It sandblasted the semiconfined space between doors and barricade; filthy gray cumulus billowed through the shattered frames and swallowed Lubin in an instant.  Clarke reached for him as the chaos engulfed her.  A brief sandstorm stung her face.
Something bumped her: a disembodied hand, fading at the wrist.  Lubin resolved at its far end; already the momentum of the blast had dissipated, the dust was settling.  In moments this impenetrable soup would be mere fog.  Moments later they'd be visible again.
      Not that they need eyes--they can probably track us by scent...
He grabbed her arm, pulled her close.  "Get us inside."
She took his arm and steered him.  A twisted, empty door frame leaned crazily out of the murk.  Somewhere, water ran.  The air was filled with the hiss of fine sifting debris.  The building sighed at the sight of its own desecration.
A ragged hole gaped in the side wall. A ridge of torn concrete and rebar rose maybe five centimeters from the floor.  It was the lip of a precipice; on the other side there was no floor, just a ruptured shaft extending into darkness both above and below.   Twisted veins of metal and plastic hung from precarious holdfasts, or lay wedged across the shaft at unforeseen angles.  A stream of water plummeted through empty space, spilling from some ruptured pipe above, splattering against some unseen grate below.
"It's a utility shaft," she reported.  "It drops off, but it's only a couple of meters across and the wall on the other side's been breached." 
Lubin hesitated at the threshold, ran his fingers briefly across a crumbling stratum of wall at his elbow.  "What's past the far wall?"
"A floor, at least.  Blast debris on it.  Can't make out details."
"Light?"
"Less than outside.  Either no windows, or blacked out."  Clarke glanced back into the clearing fog.  "Those dogs could be—"
"Let's go."
They emerged into a dark, high-ceilinged space that was obviously part of the main reception area.  Lubin spun and aimed back at the hole through which they'd come.  Nothing jumped out at them.  Nothing followed.
"Main lobby," Clarke reported.  "Dark.  Reception pedestals and kiosks over to the left. Nobody here."
"Dogs?"
"Not yet.  Maybe they're not allowed indoors."
"Or maybe he called them off."   He was still at the breach, exploring the broken edges of the inner wall with his hands.  "What's this?" he asked.
She leaned closer.  In the boosted half-light, something glimmered from the torn cross-section like a vein of precious ore.  A thin layer of some metallic substance, from the looks of it, embedded just below the surface of the wall.  Here and there, bits of it protruded from the shattered substrate.
"Mesh of some kind," she told him.  "Metallic, very fine weave.  Almost like thick dense cloth."
He nodded grimly.  "Faraday cage."
"What?"
"Shielding.  From the effects of the pulse."
Like a handclap from God, the lights went on.
EMPATH
Instantly Clarke was snow-blind.  She brought up the H&K, waved it wildly in no particular direction.  "The lights—"
"I know."
From somewhere deep in the building, the sudden hum of reawakened machinery.
"Jesus Priestpoking Christ," sighed an omnipresent voice.  "You could've just called, you know.  I'd've opened the front doors if you'd asked nicely."
"Achilles?"  Her eyecaps were adjusting; objects and architecture resolved from the whitewash.
"Or you could've just landed on the roof.  God, Ken, what happened to your—shit.  You're blind, aren't you?"
The fog wasn't entirely in her caps.  Dust from the explosion still hung in the air, bleeding contrast from their surroundings.  Scree fanned out across the floor from the hole they'd climbed in through.  Polished stone paneling on the opposite wall, a good ten meters from the breach, had cracked and fallen in a jagged heap.
Back around the corner, directly facing the front-end barricade, dormant information pedestals grew from the floor like a grove of Platonic tree stumps.  Past them, past the abandoned reception counter and the brochure dispensers and the waiting area for guided tours, emerald and ruby LED's twinkled from a row of security gates.  Those were active.
So were the ventilators.  They tugged wisps and streamers of suspended dust into grilles in the ceiling, clearing the air.  An alarm went off in Clarke's head:  "Ken, the vents—"
He shook his head, a subtle twitch:  Not yet.
"You've been holding out on us," he said to the room.  "You were supposed to find out who was tracking us down on the ridge."
"And indeed, I have been working on that very thing," the room replied.  "Whenever I get the chance.  There are other pressing demands on my time, though.  You may have noticed." 
"We have," Lubin said mildly.  "We also have it on good authority that you'd already discovered a great deal before you lost so much of your resource base.  We can tell you how to get that back, by the way."
"Uh huh.  And you couldn't have just phoned me up and made the same offer from Podunk, Maine or wherever you were?"
"We tried.  The lines have been rather unreliable lately." 
The building hummed quietly for a moment, as if in thought.  Across the lobby, the telltales on the leftmost security gate winked green.
"Through there," Desjardins said.
Each gatepost was a brushed-aluminum cylinder half a meter across, extending from floor to ceiling like the bars of a cage.  The only way in was between them.  A black band the height of Clarke's forearm girdled each post at eye level, twinkling with color-coded constellations—but the whole band flushed red before they were halfway across the room.
"Oh, right," Desjardins remarked.  "Security will cut you into little cubes if you try to sneak anything past."  A curved panel beneath the display slid back at their approach.  "Just throw everything in there."
Lubin set his pistol and belt down inside he chamber.  Clarke followed suit with her own weapon while Lubin shrugged off his pack.  It clanked and rattled as he set it on top of the pile.  The panel slid shut.
The wraparound display bloomed into a riot of images and acronyms.  Clarke recognized some of it from Lubin's tutorial on the way up: taser and microwave gun; a mechanical springlift; aerosol flypaper.  Other things she'd never seen before.  She wasn't even sure whether Lubin had just acquired them, or brought them from his stash at the bottom of the Atlantic.
"Is that an electron stripper?" Desjardins asked.  "And a pulse bomb!  You brought your own pulse bomb!"
"A very small one," Lubin admitted.  "Yours was significantly larger." 
"That's everything, then?" Desjardins asked.  "No nasty biosols or hidden freakwire?  Because I'm telling you, those gates are very unforgiving.  You walk through with any—"
"Our implants," Clarke said.
"Those will pass."
Lubin stepped between the gateposts.  No klaxons sounded, no lasers lanced down from overhead.  Clarke stepped after him.
"The elevators are just around the corner," Desjardins said.
Completely disarmed, they stepped into Desjardins's parlor.  Clarke led Lubin with soft words and a hand on the elbow.  She didn't dare speak her mind, even in a whisper.  But she gave his arm the slightest squeeze, and knew after all their long years together that he'd know what she meant:  He didn't buy it for a second.
Lubin replied with a blind glance and a twitch of the lip:  Of course not.
All according to plan.  Such as it was.

#

She had to take the physics on faith.
She could buy everything else that Lubin had laid out.  It didn't matter whether Desjardins believed their story, so long as he thought they might be useful.  He wouldn't try to kill them outright until convinced otherwise.
Which didn't mean that he wouldn't still try to disable them.  He wasn't about to let anyone into his secret lair without taking precautions—disarming them, confining them, cutting their strings.
Nothing lethal, Lubin had said, and nothing that'll damage the enclosure.  That limits his options.  We can handle it.
Fine, as far as it went.  It was how they were going to handle it that she couldn't quite get behind.
A good half-liter of water sloshed through the plumbing in her chest, unable to drain because of the tape on her electrolysis intake.  Five hundred milliliters didn't sound like much.  When she swam through the deeps a steady current of seawater flowed through her implants, endlessly replenished.  It hardly seemed possible that the stagnant dregs trapped there now would last more than a moment.
Four hundred fifty grams of molecular oxygen, Lubin had said.  That's almost what you'd get in two thousand liters of air.
Her head couldn't argue with the numbers.  But her gut was no mathematician.
A rank of elevators stood before them.  One set of doors was open; soft light spilled from the compartment behind. 
He'll confine us first.
They entered.  The doors slid shut.  The cage began to move.
Down.
This is insane, she thought.  This can't work.  But already, she imagined she could hear the soft hiss of gas from hidden nozzles...
She coughed and tripped her implants, praying to some indeterminate deity that Lubin hadn't fucked up his calculations.
He hadn't.  A familiar, subtle vibration started somewhere in her chest.  Her guts writhed and flooded with their own private stock of isotonic saline.  The liquid rose in her throat and filled her mouth.  Brief nausea accompanied the flooding of her middle ears.  A salty trickle ran down her chin before she remembered to clamp her lips together.    The world muted, all sounds suddenly faint and distant except for the beating of her own heart.
Just like that, she lost the urge to breathe.
The descent continued.  If Desjardins found anything suspicious about two tightlipped people in an elevator, he wasn't making it obvious.  Clarke felt warm wetness on her upper lip:  her nose was running.  She reached up and gave it a scratch, inconspicuously jamming the plug in her left nostril tight against the leak.
Suddenly her body thrummed, deep inside, an almost subsonic quaking that vibrated her bones as though they were the parts of some great bass instrument.  Faint nausea struck her in the throat.  Her bowels quavered.
The two most likely options, Lubin had mused, are gas and infrasound.
She didn't know if gas was in Desjardins's arsenal—for all she knew the air around them was already saturated.  But this was obviously some kind of squawkbox.  The sound dish must stretch across the whole ceiling of the elevator, or maybe beneath the floor.  The walls focused its vibrations, built resonances within the cage.  The sound would be tuned to build intolerable harmonics in the lungs and middle ears, in the sinuses and trachea.
It made her sick even with her airways and hard cavities flooded; she could scarcely imagine the impact on unbuttressed flesh.  The implants didn't deal with gastrointestinal gases—deep sea pressure collapsed those soft pockets down with no ill effect—and acoustic attacks were generally tuned to harder, more predictable air spaces anyway.  Desjardins's squawkbox was doing something down there, though.  It was all she could do to keep from vomiting saline all over the compartment, from shitting in her diveskin.   Any dryback would be on the floor by now, soiled and retching or unconscious.  Clarke clenched at both ends and hung on.
The elevator stopped.  The lights went out.
He knows, she thought.  He figured it out, of course he figured it out.  How could we think he wouldn't?  How could he not notice?
Any second the elevator would lurched back into motion, drag them up through this ruined, booby-trapped derelict where sixty-five floors of countermeasures would turn them into— 
Her head cleared.  Her bones stopped tingling.  Her bowels returned to the fold.
"Okay, guys.  End of the line."  Desjardins's voice was tinny and distant in Clarke's flooded ears.  "Come on out."
The doors slid open.

#

An oasis of bright machinery on a vast dark plain.  That's what naked eyes would have seen:  the Second Coming perhaps, a Christ-figure bathed in light and technology while all around was an infinite void.  
To Lenie Clarke there was no darkness.  The void was a converted parking garage, an empty gray cavern stretching half a half city block on a side.  Evenly-spaced rows of support pylons held the ceiling from the floor.  Plumbing and fiberop emerged from the walls, crawled along their surfaces like a webbing of sparse vines.  Cables converged into a loosely-bound trunk, winding along the floor to a horseshoe of workstations lit by chemical lightstrips.  
Christ was someone Lenie Clarke had met before.   She'd first encountered him in darkness much deeper than this, a prisoner of Ken Lubin.  Back then, Achilles Desjardins had been a man convinced he was about to die.
It had been so much easier to read him, then.
Beside her, Lubin took a breath.  Clarke shut down her implants and did the same, yanking the plugs from her nose before the tide had fully receded within her.  In the center of the room, in the heart of his high-tech horseshoe, Desjardins watched them approach.
"I thought I could make up for it," he said.
In some strange, twisted way it was actually good to see him again.
"For being a monster," he explained as if someone had asked.  "Why I joined the Patrol, you know?  I couldn't change what I was, but I thought—you know, if I helped save the world, maybe that could make up for it somehow."  His mouth spread in a rueful smile.  "Pretty stupid, right?  Look where it got me."
"Look where it got everyone," Lubin said.
Desjardins's smile vanished.  There was no shielding on his eyes, and yet somehow he was suddenly as opaque as any rifter.
Please, Clarke thought.  Let this all be some monstrous, stupid mistake.  Please.  Tell us we've misread everything.  Prove us wrong.
"I know why you're here," he said, looking at Lubin.
"You let us in anyway," Lubin observed.
"Well, I hoped to be at a bit more of an advantage by now, but whatever.  Nice trick with the implants, by the way.  I didn't even think they'd work without your diveskins sealed up.  Pretty stupid mistake for Achilles the Master Pattern-Matcher, eh?"  He shrugged.  "I've had a lot on my mind lately."
"You let us in," Lubin repeated.
Desjardins nodded.  "Yeah.  That's far enough, by the way."
They were four meters from his treehouse.  Surprisingly, Lubin stopped.  Clarke followed his lead.
"You want us to kill you?" she asked.  "Is that it?"
"Death By Rifter, huh?"  He snorted a soft laugh.  "There'd be a certain poetry to that, I guess.  But no."
"What, then?"
He cocked his head; the gesture made him look about eight years old.  "You were the ones who pulled that kin-selection trick with my Lenies, weren't you?"
Clarke nodded, swallowing on the realization:  So he's behind those too.
He's guilty after all....
"I figured," Desjardins admitted.  "It's the kind of thing that would only occur to someone who knew the whole story.  Not many of those left up here.  And the thing of it is, it's easy enough to do but it's not so simple to undo."  He looked hopefully at Lubin.  "But you said you knew how to—?"
"I lied," Lubin said.
"Yeah.  I kind of figured that too."  Desjardins shrugged.  "So I guess there's only one thing left to talk about, isn't there?"
Clarke shook her head.  "Achilles, what are you—"
Lubin tensed beside her.  Desjardins's eyes flickered to the side for the merest instant; cued, the surface of a nearby wall sparkled and brightened before them.  The image that resolved on the smart paint was hazy but instantly recognizable:  a sonar composite.
"It's Atlantis," Clarke said, suddenly uncertain.
"I see it," Lubin said.
"Not real-time, of course," the 'lawbreaker explained.  "The baud rate's a fucking trickle, and with all the range and cover issues I can only sneak in and grab a shot like this once in a while.  But you get the idea."
Lubin stood motionless. "You're lying."
"Word of advice, Ken.  You know how some of your people kind of just go off the deep end and wander into the black?  You really shouldn't let them take squids when they go.  You never know where their security transponders might end up."
"No."  Clarke shook her head.  "You?  It was you down there?"  Not Grace.  Not Seger.  Not the corpses or the rifters or the M&Ms or even two lousy guys on a boat. 
You.  All along.
"I can't take all the credit,"  Desjardins admitted.  "Alice helped me tweak ?ehemoth."
"Reluctantly, I'd guess,"  Lubin said.
Oh, Achilles.  One chance to fix the mess I made and you fucked it up.  One chance to make peace and you threaten everyone I ever knew.  One lousy, faint hope, and you—
How dare you.  How dare you.
A thin, final straw vanished in her hand.
She stepped forward.  Lubin held her back.
Desjardins ignored her.  "I'm not an idiot, Ken.  You're not the main attack force, you're just all you could scrape together on short notice.  But you're not an idiot either, so there are reinforcements on the way." He held up his hand to preempt any protest, although Lubin hadn't moved.  "That's okay, Ken, really.  I knew it was bound to happen sooner or later, and I took all the necessary precautions.  Although thanks to you, I do seem to have lost a certain finesse when it comes to my big guns..."
His eyes jiggled slightly in their sockets.  His fingers twitched.  Clarke saw Ricketts, sweet-talking his way into Phocoena with a wink and a glance.  
The image on the wall dissolved. Numbers appeared in its place.
"Now I am in real-time contact with these guys.  Can you see them, Ken?  Channel 6?"
Lubin nodded.
"Then you know what they are."
Clarke knew too.  Four sets of lats and longs.  Depth readings, zeroed.  Targeting ranges.  A row of little flashing icons that said HOLDING.
"I don't want to do this," Desjardins said.  "It was going to be my retirement home, after all.  I never wanted to blow it up, just—hobble parts of it.  Smooth the transition, so to speak.  But if I'm gonna be dead anyway—"
She twisted in Lubin's grip.  But Lubin was immovable.
"I do have other options," the 'lawbreaker continued.  "Contingency villas, you might say.  I can go to one of those instead."  He lifted a hand to the telemetry.  "You've got a lot more riding on this than me."
He planned it for years, she realized.  Even when we thought he was helping us.  And ever since we've been cowering in the dark like good little rabbits while our lines went dark and our contacts dried up and it was him all along, cutting us off, fumigating the place so there wouldn't be any uncooperative tenants around when his luck ran out and he needed a place to hide...
"You asshole," she whispered, straining forward.  Lubin's hand shackled her arm like a band of granite. 
He didn't look at her.  "So when are the cavalry coming, Ken?  How did you call them in?  How much do they know?"
"I tell you," Lubin said, "and you call off the attack."
"No, Ken, you call off your attack.  Use whatever clever code words you set in place to shut down your sub's autopilot, or to convince Helsinki that you were mistaken, or whatever it takes."
Lubin shook his head. "Then you blow up Atlantis anyway."
"What for?  I have other options, as I said.  Why waste all those perfectly good hostages for no payoff?  They're worth way more to me alive."
"For now."
"Now is all we've got, buddy."
Clarke glared: from the man who had tried to kill her, to the man who'd risked his life to stop him.  Every hour you're in charge, you kill more people than ever lived in Atlantis, she thought.
Every hour I kill more people, by leaving you there.
And Ken Lubin was about to cut a deal.  She could see it in his stance, in that ruined blind face that had been at her side and behind her back all these years.  He wasn't entirely inscrutable.  Not to her.  Not now.
"I know you, Ken," Desjardins was saying.  "We go way back, you and I.  We're soul mates.  We make our own rules, and by God we live by them.  People don't matter.  Populations don't matter.  What matters is the rules, am I right, Ken?  What matters is the mission.
"If you don't deal, the mission fails."
"Ken," she whispered.
"But you can save them,"  the 'lawbreaker continued.  "Isn't that why you came back in the first place?  Just give me your stats and the mission succeeds.  You walk away, I abort the strike, and before I disappear I'll even send you a fix for that nasty new strain of ?ehemoth they've been wrestling with back on the ridge.  I gather by now a fair number of your buddies are seriously under the weather down there."
She remembered a floating machine that had used his voice:  If killing ten saves a thousand it's a deal.  She remembered Patricia Rowan, torn apart on the inside, the face she presented to the world cold and unflinching:  I tried to serve the greater good, she'd said.
"Or," Desjardins said, "you can try and take me out, and kill everyone you came up here to save."  His eyes were locked on Lubin's.  It was as though the two of them shared their own pocket universe, as though Clarke didn't even exist.  "Your choice.  But you really shouldn't take too long making up your mind—your tweaks are fucking things up all over the place.  I don't know even how long I can keep control of these circuits."
She thought of what Patricia Rowan would have done, faced with this choice.  She thought of the millions dead who would not have died, if only she had.  She remembered Ken Lubin, a hundred years before, challenging:  Is there anything you wouldn't do, for the chance to take it back? 
"No," she said softly.
Desjardins raised an eyebrow and—finally— deigned to look at her.  "I wasn't talking to you.  But if I were Lenie Clarke—" He smiled.  "—I wouldn't be shameless enough to pretend I gave a flying fuck about the rest of the world."
She dropped to the floor, twisting fast to the left.  Lubin staggered and clenched, too late.  Clarke's shoulder screamed briefly, then popped back into place.
Then she was free, and springing forward.
"Lenie," Lubin hissed behind her.  She ignored him, launched herself directly at Desjardins.  He won't risk it, she told herself.  It's his only leverage, he's dead if he hits the button, he must know he's—
Desjardins's eyes flickered left.  His fingers twitched.  And a tiny thread of doubt blossomed into full-blown horror as the numbers on the wall began to move...  
HOLDING transmuted into a whole new word, again and again and again along the bottom of the board.  Clarke tried desperately not to read it, drove forward on the wings of some frantic infantile hope maybe if I don't see it it won't happen, maybe there's still time, but she did she it, she couldn't help seeing it, spelled out in quadruplicate full-stop before the whole board went dark: 
COMMIT.
With the next step she toppled.
Something hummed deep in her head.  Her bones sang with subtle electricity.  Her legs collapsed beneath her, her arms were dead weights at her sides.  Her skull cracked painfully against the back of a workstation, cracked again against the floor.  Her lung deflated with a tired sigh—she tried to hold her breath but suddenly she was slack-jawed and drooling.  Her bladder voided.  Implants clicked and stuttered in her chest.
"You gotta love the symmetry," a voice remarked from somewhere on the other side of the universe.  "The ultimate victim, you know?  The ultimate victim, and the most powerful woman in the world all rolled into one tight little bod.  And I, well, I'm the last word in one or two things myself..."
She couldn't feel a heartbeat.  Darkness roared up from somewhere deep in her skull, swept swirling across her eyes.
"It's fucking mythic is what it is," the voice continued, distant and barely audible. "We just had to get together..."
She didn't know what he was talking about.  She didn't care.  There was nothing in her world but noise and chaos, nothing in her head but COMMIT COMMIT COMMIT COMMIT.
They don't even know they're dead, she thought.  The torpedoes haven't reached Atlantis yet.  They're living the last few minutes of their lives and they don't even know it.
They'll live longer than me... 
A hand around her ankle; friction against the floor.
Bye, Jelaine.  Bye Avril.  Bye Dale and Abra and Hannuk...
A great gulping wheeze, very close.  The sensation of distant flesh expanding. 
Bye Kevin.  Bye Grace.  Sorry we could never work it out...
A pulse.  She had a pulse.
Bye Jerry.  Bye Pat.  Bye again...
There were voices.  There was light, somewhere.  Everywhere.
Bye, Alyx.  Oh God, I'm so sorry.  Alyx.
"...bye, world."  
But that voice had come from outside her head.
She opened her eyes.
"You know I'm serious," Desjardins was saying.  
Ken Lubin stood just beyond the pool of light.  Achilles Desjardins stood within it.  They confronted each other from opposite sides of a waist-high workstation.  
Lubin must have pulled her out of the neuroinduction field.  He must have saved her life again.  Not bad for a blind psychopath, Clarke thought.  Now he stood staring sightlessly into the face of his enemy, his hand extended.  Probably feeling out the edge of the field.  
"Impressive little bitch, I have to admit,"  Desjardins said.  "Willing to sacrifice a handful of people she actually knows for a planetful of people she doesn't.  I thought she was way too human to be so rational."  He shook his head.  "But the whole point is kind of lost if the world blows up anyway, no?   I mean, all those runaways on the Ridge are about to die in—oh, sorry, who've just died—and for what?  The only thing that'll give their deaths any meaning at all is if you turn around and walk away."
They're gone, Clarke thought.  I killed them all...
"You know how many battellites are still wobbling around up there, Ken.  And you know I'm good enough to have got into at least a few of 'em.  Not to mention all the repositories of chemical and biological weapons kicking around groundside after a hundred years of R&D.  All those tripwires run right through my left ventricle, buddy.  Lenie should thank the spirit of motherfucking entropy that she didn't kill me, or the heavens would be raining fire and brimstone by now."
Clarke tried to move.  Her muscles buzzed, hung over.  She could barely lift her arm.  Not the usual med-cubby field by a long shot.  It had been cranked to quell riots.  It was industrial. 
Still Lubin didn't speak.  He took a couple of steps to the left, his arm still extended.  
"Channels seven through nineteen," Desjardins told him.  "Look for yourself.  See the kill switches?  See where they lead?  I've had five years to set this up, Ken.  You kill me, you kill billions."
"I expect you'll find a number of those tripwires are no longer connected," Lubin remarked.
"What, your pack-hunting Lenies?  They can't get into the lines until the lines open.  And even then, so what?  They're her, Ken.  They're concentrated essence of Lenie Clarke at the absolute peak of her game.  They get their teeth into a tripwire, you think for a second they won't pull it themselves?"
Lubin cocked his head slightly, as if taking note of some interesting sound.
"It's still a good deal, Ken.  Take it.  You'd have a hard time killing me anyway.  I mean, I know what a tough hombre you are, but your motor nerves short out just the same as anyone else's.  And not to put too fine a point on it, but you're blind."
Realization stabbed Clarke like an icicle:  Achilles, you idiot, don't you know what you're doing?  Haven't you read his file?
Lubin was speaking:  "So why deal in the first place?"
"Because you are a tough hombre.  You could probably hunt me down by smell if it came to that, and even though you're having a really off day I'd just as soon not take the chance."
You're talking to Ken Lubin, she raged silently, trapped in her own dead flesh.  Do you actually think you're threatening him?
"So we disappear, you disappear, the world relaxes.  Until someone else kills you."
Clarke tried to speak; all she could force out was a weak moan, barely audible even to herself.  
It's not a threat at all—
"You disappear," Desjardins said.  "Lenie's mine."
It's an inducement...
"You're proceeding from a false premise,"  Lubin pointed out.
"Yeah?  What premise is that?"
"That I give a shit."
Clarke caught the briefest glimpse of the muscles bunching in Lubin's legs.  Suddenly he was airborne, hurtling through the field and overtop the barrier from an impossible standing start.  He rammed into Desjardins like an avalanche, pure inertia; they toppled out of sight behind the console, to the sound of bodies and plastic in collision.
A moment's silence.
She lay there, tingling and paralyzed, and wondered who to root for.  If Lubin's momentum hadn't carried him completely through the field he'd be dying now, with no one to pull him to safety.  Even if he'd made it across, he'd still be helpless for a while.  Desjardins might have a chance, if the collision hadn't stunned him.
Achilles, you asshole.  You murderer, you psychopath, you genocidal maniac.  You foul vicious monster.  You're worse than I am.  There's no hell deep enough for you.
Get out of there.  Please.  Before he kills you.
Something gurgled.  Clarke heard the faint scratching of fingernails on plastic or metal. A meaty thud, like someone slinging a dead fish against the deck—or the flopping of a limb, stunned in transit, struggling back to life.  A brief scuffling sound.
Ken.  Don't do it.
She gathered all her strength into a single, desperate cry:  "No."  It came out barely whispered.
On the far side of the barricade, a wet snapping pop.  Then nothing at all.
Oh God, Ken.  Don't you know what you've done?
Of course you know.  You've always known.  We could've saved it, we could have made things it right, but they were right about you.  Pat was right.  Alyx was right.  You monster.  You monster.  You wasted it all.
God damn you.
She stared up at the ceiling, tears leaking around her eyecaps, and waited for the world to end.

#

She could almost move again, if only she could think of a reason to.  She rolled onto her side.  He sat cross-legged on the floor beside her, his face impenetrable.
"How long?" she rasped.
"Long?" 
"Or has it started already?  Are the claves on fire?  Are the bombs falling?  Is it enough for you, are you fucking hard yet?"
"Oh.  That."  Lubin shrugged.  "He was bluffing."
"What?"  She struggled up on her elbows.  "But—the tripwires, the kill-switches—he showed you..."
"Props."
"You saw through them?"
"No.  They were quite convincing."
"Then how—"
"It didn't make sense that he'd do it."
"Ken, he destroyed Atlant—"  A sudden, impossible ray of hope:  "Unless that was a bluff too?..."
"No," Lubin said quietly.
She sank back.  Let me wake up from this, she prayed.
"He destroyed Atlantis because he had another deterrent to fall back on.  Making good on the smaller threat increased the credibility of the larger one."  The man without a conscience shrugged.  "But if you're dead, deterrence has already failed.  There's no point in acting on a threat when it can't possibly achieve your goal."
"He could have, easily.  I would have."
"You're vindictive.  Desjardins wasn't.  He was mainly interested in self-gratification."  Lubin smiled faintly.  "That was unusually enlightened of him, actually.  Most people are hardwired for revenge.  Perhaps Spartacus freed him of that too."
"But he could have done it."
"It wouldn't have been a credible threat otherwise."
"So how did you know?"
"Doomsday machines are not easy things to assemble.  It would have taken a great deal of time and effort for no actual payoff; faking it was the logical alternative."
"That's not good enough, Ken.  Try again."
"I also subjected him to Ganzfeld interrogation once.  It gave me certain insights into—"
She shook her head. 
He didn't speak for a while.  Finally:  "We were both off the leash."
"I thought you gave yourself a new leash.  I thought your rules..."
"Still.  I know how he felt."  Lubin got to his feet.
"Did you know what he'd do?"  She couldn't hide the pleading in her voice.
He seemed to look down at her.  "Lenie, I've never known anything my entire life.  All I can ever do is go with the odds."
It wasn't what she wanted to hear.  She wanted him to describe some telltale glitch in Desjardins's shadow-show, some compelling bit of evidence that said the worst will not happen.  She wanted some channel of ostensible input traced back to an empty socket, impossibly disconnected from its fiberop.  Anything but a gamble based on empathy between two men without conscience.
She wondered if he was disappointed, even a little bit, that Desjardins had been faking it after all.  She wondered if he'd really been expecting it.
"What are you so down about?" Lubin asked.  "We just saved the world."
She shook her head.  "He was going to lose anyway.  He knew that better than we did."
"Then we advanced the schedule significantly, at least.  We saved millions of lives."
How many millions, she wondered, and then: what difference does it make?  Could saving twelve million today make up for killing ten million in the past?  Could the blood-soaked Meltdown Madonna somehow transmute into Saint Lenie In the Black, savior of two million net?  Was the algebra of guilt really so elementary?
For Lenie Clarke, the question didn't even apply.  Because any millions saved today had only been spared from a fate she'd condemned them to in the first place.  There was no way, no way at all, that she would ever be able to balance those books. 
"At least," she said, "the debt won't get any bigger."
"That's a counterproductive attitude," Lubin observed.
She looked up at him.  "How can you say that?"  Her voice was so soft she could barely hear herself.  "Everyone's dead..."
He shook his head.  "Almost everyone.  The rest of us get another chance."
Ken Lubin reached out his hand.  Lenie Clarke stared for a long moment before she found the strength to take it.
We get another chance, she reflected, pulling herself to her feet.
Even though we don't deserve one.


Epilog:  Not God Emperor of Starfish








Failure to converge.  Confidence limits exceeded.
Further predictions unreliable.

Acknowledgements
The usual gang of suspects, without whom I could never have pulled this off:
David Hartwell, my editor, unerringly nailed some serious structural problems with the first draft and helped me fix them.   Moshe Feder guided the manuscript through the day-to-day grind from delivery to parturition.  Donald Maass, my agent, negotiated the conditions under which all of this was carried out.
In what has become an annual rite, a motley collection of subversive literary and political malcontents—Laurie Channer, Cory Doctorow, Nalo Hopkinson, Becky Maines, John McDaid, Janis O'Conner, Steve Samenski, Isaac Szpindel, and Pat York— met clandestinely at an Undisclosed Location back during the summer of 2002.  There, they tore apart the first two chapters of this puppy (among others), then helped to sow them back together again.  This is the second time that a whole bunch of people have seen how my novel begins, while virtually no one sees the rest until it's too late to change anything.  I suspect self-esteem issues may be involved.
But the fact that hardly anybody read the whole thing doesn't mean that lots of people didn't contribute to it.  David Nickle offered advice, insights, and endless mockery throughout the process; his input proved so valuable I can almost overlook the fact that I had to keep getting up at five thirty in the fucking morning and run for ten miles in order to get it.  Laurie Channer withstood endless pissing and moaning over a story for which her input was frequently solicited even though she was never actually allowed to read the damned thing.  (She still hasn't, as of this writing.)
I owe many details of the helicopter crash scene to Glenn Norman and Glenn Morrison, both pilots, and both more helpful to pesky authors than I had any right to expect.  I was astonished to learn that even when a helicopter loses all power in mid-flight, it's still possible to walk away from the crash by practicing an emergency technique called "autorotation".  Glenn Morrison, in fact, survived a crash eerily parallel to the one described herein, except for the fact that he is not blind.   (For the record, he doesn't think there's a hope in hell off pulling off that maneuver in real life if you are blind, and he knows his stuff.  On the other hand, he doesn't know Ken Lubin.)
Parts of other people's life histories made their way into the story.  Certain impressionistic details of the dog attack took their inspiration from wild canines encountered by one Rob Cunningham on his travels through India.  (You may know Rob as the dude who created those gorgeous spaceship designs for Homeworld and Homeworld 2, the RTS computer games from Relic Entertainment.)  Eight-year-old Achilles Desjardins's experiments with aerobraking were lifted from the childhood confessions of Mark Showell, fisheries biologist, although Mark is not a sexual sadist so far as I know.   (If anything, he's a masochist:  I knew the guy he chose to do his Master's under.)
Isaac Szpindel, MD, Ph.D., skilled in so many and varied endeavors that it makes me sick, helped me load Taka's lines with plausible medical chrome.  Dave "the bioinformatician" Block answered numerous impertinent questions about artificial nucleotides and minimum genotype sizes.  (Unfortunately, one of the things he taught me was that you can't cram a 1.1MB genotype into a cell 250nm across, which contradicts physical stats for ?ehemoth I already described in Maelstrom.)  Major David Buck, of the New Zealand Army, helped me out on the subject of Fuel Air Explosive ordnance.  Steve Ballentine, Hannu Blommila, Rick Kleffel, Harry Pulley, Catriona Sparks, Bebe Schroer, Janine Stinson, Mac Tonnies, and David Williams have all pointed me to relevant research papers, reviews, opinions, and/or news articles that went into the ?ehemoth mix one way or another.  Not to mention others whom I've probably forgotten, and of whom I hereby pre-emptively beg forgiveness.
You can't blame any of these good folks if this book sucks, since none of them were allowed to read it.  (If it does suck, maybe that's why.)   You can't even blame David Hartwell, who did read it, because the book would have sucked even harder without his input.   You can only blame me, and you might as well since I've already got your money.  
Well, fifty cents of it, anyway. 


Notes and references
Once again it's time to trot out a variety of citations that will hopefully serve as a valuable educational resource, even though they're primarily intended to cover my ass against nitpickers.
If you have come late to this saga, you may not find the following references as complete as you'd like.  Any real-world science elements introduced in Starfish and Maelstrom were cited at the end of those books; I don’t repeat those citations here, even though many elements persist into ?ehemoth.  (I do, however, cite related research that has come out since Maelstrom was released, especially if it makes me look especially prescient in some way.)  So if you're looking for my original sources on smart gels, "fine-tuning", or the Maelstrom Ecosystems, you'll have to go back and check the other books.  You still may not find everything you're looking for, but you might at least make my Amazon numbers look a little less dismal.

Atlantis:  There Goes the Neighborhood
There is a place in the middle of the North Atlantic where the currents stop dead, an eye in the middle of that great slow gyre revolving between Europe and North Americaxxxvii.  It seemed like a reasonable spot to hide from lethal particles potentially borne on wind and water, so I put Atlantis there.  The surrounding topography took some inspiration from a 2003 report on abyssal mineralogyxxxviii.  Impossible Lake was inspired by the ultrasaline lens of heavy water described in the ground-breaking documentary series "Blue Planet"xxxix.  The failure of the Labrador Current and the Gulf Stream seems plausible in view of increased melt water discharge from the Arctic (e.g., xl).  And I know they don't actually figure into the plot anywhere, but Lenie Clarke worries about them on her way to the surface in Chapter One so it's fair game:  giant squids now outmass the whole human race, and they're getting even biggerxli!

?ehemoth
We continue to discover life increasingly deep in the lithosphere.  At last count, deep crustal rocks beneath the Juan de Fuca Ridge—yes, the very ridge from which ?ehemoth escaped at the end of Starfish—have yielded evidence of heretofore unknown microbial lifeformsxlii.  Water samples from boreholes 300 m below that seabed show depleted levels of sulphate:  something down there is alive, unclassified, and consuming sulphur.  There's no evidence that it would destroy the world if it ever reached the surface, but then again there's no evidence it wouldn't, either.  I can always hope.
That hope is a faint one, though.  Patricia Rowan was right to argue that ?ehemoth, by virtue of its ancient origins, should be an obligate anaerobexliii.  To even make it out onto the seabed would require either a very convenient mutation, or a deliberate tweak.  Damn lucky the plot called for one anyway.
Waters et al. have recently reported the discovery of an ancient, hot-vent-dwelling nanobe called Nanoarchaeum equitansxliv; genome size, proportion of junk DNA, and diameter are all in the ?ehemoth ballpark.  Even better, it's a parasite/symbiont (it lives on a much larger Archeon called Ignicoccus).  However, its minimalist genome (about 500 kilobases, half the size of ?ehemoth's) lacks the recipes for certain vital enzymes, which it must therefore get from its host.  It could never be a free-liver.  ?ehemoth, with its larger genome, is more self-sufficient—but how it crams all those extra genes into a capsule only 60% the size remains a mystery. 
The fishheads and the corpses got into a bit of a debate about the odds of ?ehemoth hitching a ride in the flesh of dispersing larval fish.  I was always worried about that myself, even back when I was writing Starfish—if true, there'd by no reason why ?ehemoth would not have, in fact, taken over the world billions of years ago.  Invertebrate larvae do seem to cross vast distances in the deep sea; fortunately they generally go into a sort of arrested development en route1, making them unlikely carriers of ?ehemoth (which needs an actively-metabolizing host to withstand long-term thermo-osmotic stress).  It also appears that even highly-dispersing larval fish species maintain fairly distinct geographic ranges, judging by the lack of genetic flow between populations around adjacent islandsxlv,xlvi.  Worst comes to worst, local topographic and chemical conditions can constrain the distribution of various deep-water speciesxlvii,xlviii.
Bottom line, I think I dodged the bullet.  This was not prescience on my part, and it may yet come back and bite me in the ass:  at least one adult fish may have swum through deep water from Patagonia all the way up to Greenlandxlix.

Seppuku
Artificial microbes are almost mainstream these days:  J. Craig Venter (the Human Genome guy) is working at creating an artificial genome even as I typel, hoping that such organisms will be able to cure the world's environmental ills.  Peter Schulz and his team have already tweaked E. coli to synthesize a novel amino acid not found in natureli, hoping it will be able to outcompete the baseline strain.  I wish them both better luck than Jakob Holtzbrink's gel-jocks had when they tweaked ?ehemoth.
Seppuku's genetic template was first synthesized by Leslie Orgellii back in 2000; yes, TNA really can duplex with conventional nucleic acids.  The idea of alien genes incorporating themselves into our own nuclear material is even more old-hat than artificial microbes—not only are our genes rife with parasitic DNA from a range of bugs, but functional genes originally brought into the cell by the ancestors of our own mitochondria appear to have migrated into the nucleusliii.  Massive horizontal gene transfer between species has occurred throughout much of Earth's historyliv, and of course the symbiotic incorporation of small cells into larger ones has a long and honorable history reflected in every eukaryotic cell on the planet.  (Back in Maelstrom I cited chloroplasts and mitochondria; apicoclasts are a related example, devolved endosymbionts found in Toxoplasma and Plasmodiumlv.) 
Taka Ouellette's awed appreciation of proline as a metabolic catalyst will probably be a little behind the times by mid-century, since Movassaghi and Jacobsen have already pointed out the potential of such simple molecules to act as enzymeslvi.

The Chemistry of Character
Some readers may wonder if I have trouble distinguishing between personality and neurochemistry.  It's a fair point, but don't blame me:  blame the scientists who can't let a week go by without reporting yet more evidence that personality is just another word for biochemistry, albeit written in an exceedingly complex font (e.g. Hannuk Yaeger's propensity for violence, rooted in his monoamine oxidase levelslvii).  Unless you're one of those Easter-bunny vitalists who believes that personality results from some unquantifiable divine spark, there's really no alternative to the mechanistic view of human nature.
A central tenet of the whole rifters saga—introduced in Starfish, and expanded in Maelstrom and Behemoth—is that false memories of abuse can cause neurological changes in the individual every bit as real as genuine memories can.  That was pretty speculative when Starfish first came out, but recent research has added empirical evidence of this effectlviii,lix.
Details on the care and feeding of sociopaths were largely taken from the work of Robert Harelx and otherslxi.  ?ehemoth's musings regarding the adaptive value of sociopathy in corporate settings may not be entirely off the mark, either24,lxii?lxiii?  (And as these references should make clear, neither Ken Lubin nor Achilles Desjardins are sociopaths in the classic sense.  More goes into such creatures than a mere absence of conscience.)
Maelstrom established that Guilt Trip took its lead largely from the genes of certain parasites which could alter the behavior of their hosts.  The actual mechanism by which this occurred was not known when that book came out, although some had speculated that it occured right down at the neurotransmitter level.  I hung Guilt Trip's hat on that hypothesis, and am now relieved to report that the gamble paid off:  at least one such parasitic puppet-master works by screwing with its host's serotonin-producing neuronslxiv.
Alice Jovellanos's denigration of the ethical impulse takes its lead from recent studies which establish that moral "reasoning" is not reasonable at all—it occurs primarily in the emotional centers of the brain, resulting in inconsistent and indefensible beliefs about whether a course of action is "right" or "wrong"lxv.  An accompanying commentary article gives a very nice summary of the so-called "Trolley Paradox", not to mention an airtight rationale for pushing people in front of trainslxvi.  Jovellanos's arguments may be simplistic—the prefrontal cortex, after all, seems to play at least some role in moral decision-makinglxvii, lxviii, lxix—but then again, Jovellanos was a bit of a zealot.  For which she paid a price.
Speaking of moral decision-making, Lenie Clarke's passion for revenge earlier in the rifters saga—not to mention Ken Lubin's unacknowledged passion for same later on—are not merely overused dramatic tropes.  We appear to be hardwired to punish those who have slighted us, even if—and this is the counterintuitive bit—even if our acts of vengeance hurt us more than those who have trespassed against uslxx.  I like to think the reason the world gets another chance at the end of this story is because, as Lubin speculates, Spartacus disabled the vengeance response in Achilles Desjardins at the same time it destroyed his conscience.  He may have been a monster.  He may have been sexual sadist.  But in that one retrofitted corner of his soul, he may have been more civilized that you or I will ever be.
And finally, the most disturbing real-world echo of this imaginary hellhole comes from the Village Voicelxxi, reporting on ongoing research towards an "anti-remorse pill"—a drug developed to cure post-traumatic stress syndrome, which would soothe the torturer as well as the tortured.  Such neurochemical tweaks would work by short-circuiting guilt itself, making it that much easier to get a good night's sleep after mowing down crowds of unruly civilians protesting unpopular government policies.  Yes, I called my version Absolution—but people, it was supposed to be ironic...

Here, the Maelstrom just moved outside...
Some background ambience from the world above the waterline:  
The Africans have no shortage of reasons to be pissed at either the Old or the New Worlds.  By mid-century, I'm postulating a sort of Dark-Continent-wide schadenfreude in response to the collapse of N'Am's societal infrastructure.  The icing on that bitter cake is the further prediction that the majority of the African population will consist of women; I base this on the fact that in Ethiopia at least, malnourished women are more likely to give birth to daughters than sonslxxii (presumably for the same energetics reasons this happens in other species).  I'm basically suggesting that generations of disease, starvation, and exploitation/indifference will result in one righteously-pissed, gender-skewed hotbed of discontent in which the myth of a victimized woman's apocalyptic vendetta would catch on real fast.  Don't say I didn't warn you.
The various bits of weaponry portrayed in this novel—from Miri's arsenal to Desjardins' booby-traps to South Africa's ICBMs— are taken from a variety of sources including the USAFlxxiii; the Economistlxxiv; Cornell University Peace Studies Programlxxv; and even the European Centre for Medium-Range Weather Forecastslxxvi.  Evidently weapons-grade infrasound isn't all its cracked up to be.   On the other hand, it seems surprisingly simple to generate your own electromagnetic pulselxxvii.

Electronic Wildlife & Digital Evolution
Maelstrom hung on the premise that the same Darwinian processes which shape life in this world are equally applicable to the digital realm—that self-replicating software will be literally alive when the conditions of natural selection are met.  That position has gained recent ground; terms like "digital organism" crop up in the most respectable scientific journalslxxviii,lxxix,lxxx, and you can now download freeware apps that let you experiment with digital evolution on your own desktoplxxxi.  E-life is proceeding on track; the Maelstrom Ecosystems can't be far behind.
Maelstrom extended theconceit of Internet-as-Ecosystem to a "consensus superorganism" that exploited the myth of the Meltdown Madonna as a reproductive strategy.  Five years further down the timeline, parts of that superorganism have transmuted—with a little help from their friends—into the Shredders and Lenies of ?ehemoth.  Ecologically, we've moved from a climax ecosystem to a weedy and impoverished landscape of virtual rats, gulls, and kudzu—and in keeping with that spirit, the virtual-ecology aspects of this novel echo the pest-species dynamics common in real-world ecosystems.
A common response to outbreaks of unwanted insect species  is to haul out the pesticides.  The pest's usual response is to a) develop resistance, and b) crank up its reproductive rate to offset the increased mortality.  Once this happens, human "managers" don't dare stop spraying, because the pest has been pushed into a state of chronic outbreak; its increased reproductive rate will result in a catastrophic population explosion the moment spraying slacks off.  This is essentially what happened during the spruce budworm infestations of the North American Maritimes back in the seventies and eightieslxxxii.
You don't need a Ph.D. to see the parallels between this and the exorcist/shredder dynamic at play in N'AmNet.  Lenie Clarke doesn't have a doctorate, but she didn't have anyone giving her a crash course in Ecology 101 either; she made her moves for her own twisted and unrelated reasons.  Ironically, it may have been the right course of action from a purely ecological standpoint.  Pest species tend to peak and crash cyclically if you just leave them alone;  once you've cranked them into outbreak mode, perhaps the only way to restore any kind of natural balance is to just take your foot off the brake, grit your teeth, and take your lumps until the system stabilizes.

Predicting the Past:
Smart gels.  Head cheeses.  Those neuron puddings that the corpses used to jam the rifters in the first half of this book, and which played a much more central role in the previous ones.  They exist now, in real life.  Neurons cultured from rat brains, now operating remote-controlled robots at a lab near youlxxxiii.
Piss me right off.  I thought I had years before this stuff caught up with me.
 

1 Spelling conjectural.
2 This is the clearest indicator of early infection.  Unfortunately, standard medbooths and quarantine checkpoints are not equipped for the detection of stereo isomers.  N'Am-wide equipment upgrades are ongoing, but will take at least six months to complete. 
1 Unwins, P.J.R. et al. 1998.  Novel nano-organisms from Australian sandstones.  American Minerologist 83: 1541-1550.
2 Broad, W.J.  2000.  Scientists find smallest form of life, if it lives.  NY Times, Jan. 18.
3 Euzéby, J.P.  March 2001.  List of bacterial names with standing in nomenclature. http://www.bacterio.cict.fr/index.html
4 Kajander, E.O., et al. 1999.  Suggestions from observations on nanobacteria isolated from blood.  In  Size Limits of Very Small Microorganisms: Proceedings of a Workshop.  National Academy Press, Washington.  164 pp.
5 Kroes et al. 1999.  Bacterial diversity within the human subgingival crevice. Proceedings of the  National Academy of  Sciences of the United States of  America  796(25): 14547-14552.
6 Rainy, P.B., and  E.R. Moxon. 2000.  When being hyper keeps you fit.  Science 288: 1186-1188.
7 Blachford, A.  1984.  Metavariation and long term evolutionary patterns.  M.Sc. thesis, Zoology, University of British Columbia, 140pp.
8 Marsh, M., and H.T. McMahon.  1999.  The structural era of endocytosis.  Science 285(5425): 215-220.
9 Decatur, A.L., and D.A. Portnoy.  2000.  A PEST-like sequence in Listeriolysin O essential for Listeria monocytogenes pathogenicity.  Science 290: 992-995.
10 Eschenmoser, A.  1999.  Chemical etiology of nucleic acid structure.  Science 284: 2118-2123.
11 Gesteland, R.F., et al.  1999.  The RNA World.  Cold Spring Harbor Laboratory Press, Cold Spring Harbor, NY.  735pp.
12 Gray, M.W., et al. 1999.  Mitochondrial Evolution.  Science 283: 1476-1481.
13 Orgel, L. 2000.  A simpler nucleic acid.  Science 290:1306-1307.
14 Orgel, L. and L. Ost.  1999. Did life originate in an RNA world? In  Size Limits of Very Small Microorganisms: Proceedings of a Workshop.  National Academy Press, Washington.  164 pp.
15 Vogel, G.  1998.  Finding life's limits.  Science 282: 1399.
16 Rasmussen, B. 2000.  Filamentous microfossils in a 3,235-million-year-old volcanogenic massive sulphide deposit.  Nature 405: 676-679.
17 Lodish, H., et al. 1995.  Molecular Cell Biology, 3rd ed.  Scientific American Books, W.H. Freeman & Co., NY. 1344pp.
18 Schulz, H.N., et al. 1999.  Dense populations of a giant sulfur bacterium in Namibian shelf sediments.  Science 284: 493-495.
19 Macmillan, M.  2000.  An Odd Kind of Fame Stories:  of Phineas Gage.  MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 576pp.
20 Anderson, S.W.  et al.  1999.  .Impairment of social and moral behavior related to early damage in human prefrontal cortex. Nature Neuroscience 2: 1032-1037.
21 Davidson, R.J.,  et al. 2000.  Dysfunction in the neural circuitry of emotion regulation—a possible prelude to violence.  Science 289: 591-594. 
22  Zimmer, C.  August 2000.  Do parasites rule the world? Discover: 80-85. 
23 Zimmer, C.  2000.  Parasites make Scaredy-rats foolhardy.  Science 289:  525-527.
24 John Rennie, J.  January, 1992.  Living Together.  Scientific American.  
25 Huberman, B.A., and R.M. Lukose. 1997. Social Dilemmas and Internet Congestion. Science 277: 535-537.  
26 Matrix-net's Internet Weather Report, at http://www.mids.org/weather/.
27 Barabasi, A.-L. et al. 1999.  Internet: Diameter of the World-Wide Web.  Nature 401: 130-131.
28 Parrish, J.K., and Edelstein-Keshet, L.  1999.  Complexity, Pattern, and Evolutionary Trade-offs in Animal Aggregation.  Science 284:  99-101.
29 Koch, C., and G.  Laurent.  1999.  Complexity and the nervous system.  Science 284: 96-98.
30 Holland, J. H.  1992.  Genetic algorithms.  Scientific American, 267(1): 66-72.
31 Wilson, D.S.  2000.  Nonzero and nonsense:  group selection, nonzerosumness, and the Human Gaia Hypothesis.  Skeptic 8(1): 84-89.
32 Service, R.  1999.  Neurons and silicon get intimate.  Science 284: 578-579.
33 Episode four of the PBS video series "The Machine that Changed the World": Go to http://www.otterbein.edu/home/fac/dvdjstck/CSC100/CSC100TMTCTW.htm#TM for further information.
34 Tegmark, M.  2000. The importance of quantum decoherence in brain processes.  Physical Review E61: 4194-4206.
35 Quantum computation in the brain? Decoherence and biological feasibility", abstract of a talk given at the 2000 Tucson Conference by the  University of Arizona's Center for Consciousness Studies (available online at http://www.consciousness.arizona.edu/hameroff/decoherence.html#Abstract)
36 Teunisse et al.  1996.  Visual hallucinations in psychologically normal people: Charles Bonnet's syndrome.  Lancet 347: 794-797.
xxxvii Van Dover, C.L., et al.  2002.  Evolution and biogeography of deep-sea vent and seep invertebrates.  Science 295:  1253-1257.
xxxviii Rona, P.A.  2003.  Resources of the sea floor.  Science 299: 673-674.
xxxix British Broadcasting Corporation.  2001.  The blue planet: a natural history of the ocean, Part 3:  The Deep.
xl Peterson, B.J., et al. 2002.  Increasing river discharge to the Arctic Ocean.  Science 298:  2171-2173.
xli Bildstein, T.  2002.  Global warming is good (if you like calamari).  Australasian Science, August 2002.
xlii Cowen, J.P, et al. 2003. Fluids from Aging Ocean Crust That Support Microbial Life.  Science  299: 120-123.
xliii Kasting, J.F., and J.L. Siefert.  2002.  Life and the evolution of Earth's atmosphere.  Science 296:  1066-1068.
xliv Waters, E., et al.  2003.  The genome of Nanoarchaeum equitans: Insights into early archaeal evolution and derived parasitism.  Proc. Nat. Acad. Sci. 100: 12984-12988;
xlv Palumbi, S.R., and R.R. Warner. 2003. Why Gobies are like Hobbits.  Science 2003 January 3; 299: 51-52.
xlvi Taylor, M.S., and M.E. Hellberg. 2003. Genetic Evidence for Local Retention of Pelagic Larvae in a Caribbean Reef Fish. Science 2003 January 3; 299: 107-109.
xlvii Vrijenhoek, R.C.  1997.  Gene flow and genetic diversity in naturally fragmented metapopulations of deep-sea hydrothermal vent animals.  J. Heredity. 88: 285-293.
xlviii Somero, G.N. 1992. Biochemical ecology of deep-sea animals. Experientia 48, 537-543.
xlix Møller, P.R., et al.  2003.  Fish migration: Patagonian toothfish found off Greenland.  Nature 421, 599.
l Zimmer, C.  2003.  Tinker, tailor:  can Venter stitch together a genome from scratch?  Science 299:  1006-1007.
li Mehl, R.A., et al.  2003.  Generation of a Bacterium with a 21 Amino Acid Genetic Code.  J. Amer. Chem. Soc. 125:935-939.
lii Orgel, L. 2000.  A simpler nucleic acid.  Science 290: 1306.
liii Gabaldón, T., and M.A. Huynen.  2003.  Reconstruction of the proto-mitochondrial metabolism.  Science 301: 609.
liv Raymond, J., et al.  2002.  Whole-genome analysis of photosynthetic prokaryotes.  Science 298: 1616-1620.
lv Funes, S., et al. 2002.  A green algal apicoplast ancestor.  Science 298:  2155.
lvi Movassaghi, M., and E.N. Jacobsen. 2002.  The simplest "Enzyme".  Science 298: 1904-1905.
lvii Caspi, A., et al. 2002. Role of genotype in the cycle of violence of maltreated children.  Science 297:  851-854.
lviii Beckman, M. 2003.  False memories, true pain.  Science 299:  1306.
lix Offer, D., et al.  2000.   Altering of Reported Experiences.  J. Amer. Academy Child and Adolescent Psych. 39(6):  735-742.
lx Hare, R.D.  1999.  Without Conscience: The Disturbing World of the Psychopaths Among Us.  Guilford Press, 236pp.
lxi Goldberg, C.  2003.  Data accumulating on psychopaths.  The Toronto Star, July 20, reprinted from the Boston Globe.
lxii MacMillan, J., and L.K. Kofoed. 1984.  Sociobiology and antisocial behavior.  J. Mental and Nervous Diseases 172, 701-06.
lxiii Harpending, H.C., and J. Sobus. 1987.  Sociopathy as an adaptation.  Ethology and Sociobiology 8, 63S-72S.
lxiv Helluy, S., and Thomas, F. 2003. Effects of Microphallus papillorobustus (Platyhelminthes, trematoda) on serotonergic immunoreactivity and neuronal architecture in the brain of Gammarus insensibilis (Crustacea, Amphipoda). Proceeding of the Royal Society of London (B.) 270: 563-568.
lxv Greene, J.D., et al.  2001. An fMRI investigation of emotional engagement in moral judgment. Science 293:  2105-2108
lxvi Helmuth, L.  2001.  Moral Reasoning Relies on Emotion.  Science 293: 1971-1972.
lxvii Macmillan, M.  2000.  An Odd Kind of Fame:  Stories of Phineas Gage.  MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, 576pp.
lxviii Anderson, S.W.  et al.  1999.  .Impairment of social and moral behavior related to early damage in human prefrontal cortex. Nature Neuroscience 2: 1032-1037.
lxix Moll, J., et al.  2002.  The Neural Correlates of Moral Sensitivity: A Functional Magnetic Resonance Imaging Investigation of Basic and Moral Emotions.   J. Neurosci., 22(7):2730-2736
lxx Sanfrey, A.G., et al.  2003.  The Neural Basis of Economic Decision-Making in the Ultimatum Game.  Science 300: 1755-1758.
lxxi Baard, E.  2003.  The Guilt-Free Soldier:  New Science Raises the Specter of a World Without Regret.  The Village Voice, January 22 - 28.  (Also http://www.villagevoice.com/issues/0304/baard.php)
lxxii Gibson, M.A. and R. Mace. 2003.  Strong mothers bear more sons in rural Ethiopia. Biology Letters (Proceedings of the Royal Society Suppl. Online) 20 May.
lxxiii "When Killing Just Won't Do"—Excerpt from Nonlethal weapons: terms and references by the United Stats Air Force Institute for National Security Studies, quoted in Harper's 306 (1833):  17-19.
lxxiv Anonymous.  2003.  Come fry with me.  The Economist 366(8309): 68-69.
lxxv Altmann, J.  1999.  Acoustic weapons—a prospective assessment:  sources, propagation, and effects of strong sound.  Occasional Paper #22, 87pp.
lxxvi Beljaars, A. 1992.  The parameterization of the planetary boundary layer.  Available at http://www.ecmwf.int/
lxxvii http://www.spacecatlighting.com/marxgenerator01.htm
lxxviii Lenski, R.E., et al. 1999.  Genome complexity, robustness, and genetic interactions in digital organisms. Nature 400: 661–664.
lxxix Wilke, C.O., and C. Adami.  2002. The biology of digital organisms. Trends Ecol Evol 17: 528–532.
lxxx O'Neill, B.  2003.  Digital evolution.  Public Library of Science Biology 1: 11-14, or http://www.plosbiology.org/plosonline/?request=get-document&doi=10.1371/journal.pbio.0000018
lxxxi http://dllab.caltech.edu/avida/
lxxxii If you're looking for primary sources on this, though, you're SOL. I'm just regurgitating memories of a grad course I took in theoretical ecology back at the University of Guelph.
lxxxiii Eisenberg, A.  2003.  Wired to the Brain of a Rat, a Robot Takes On the World.  The New York Times, May 15, 2003.
---------------

------------------------------------------------------------

---------------

------------------------------------------------------------



Watts/Starfish 	11

Starfish/Watts	179


     Maelstrom/Watts

cdii




clxxx

     Maelstrom/Watts

cdiv


Maelstrom/Watts	




?ehemoth: Seppuku/Watts	274

432
Watts/Starfish 

